Course Information
Course Code: GST 203
Course Title: Introduction to Philosophy and Logic
Credit Unit: 2
Course Status: Compulsory
Semester: 2nd
Required Study Hour: 4 hours per week
Year of Course Review 2018
Course Team
Course Reviewer: Dr, Oyekunle O. Adegboyega
Instructional Designer: Inegbedion, Juliet O. (Ph.D.)
Learning Technologists: Dr. Adewale Adesina, Nura Maidoki,& Henry Ude
Content Editor: Prof. Uduma Oji Uduma
Copy Editors: Inegbedion, Juliet O. (Ph.D.) & Christiana Uzoukwu (Mrs)
Ice Breaker
Upload your passport and introduce yourself by stating your names, what you
do for a living, your hobby, your expectation in this course and the name you
would prefer to be called during this course.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA
1
© 2018 by NOUN Press
National Open University of Nigeria
Headquarters
University Village
Plot 91, Cadastral Zone
Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway
Jabi, Abuja
Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island, Lagos
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng
URL: www.nou.edu.ng
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any
form or by any means, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Published by:
National Open University of Nigeria
Printed by NOUN Press
np@noun.edu.ng
Printed 2018
ISBN: 978-978-8521-92-1
2
Course Guide
Introduction
Welcome to GST 203: A Study Guide for the Distance Learner. GST 203 is
a two-credit unit course that has minimum duration of one semester. It is a
compulsory course for undergraduate students in Science Programmes
including Science Education in the university. The course guides you on the
techniques of studying to achieve academic success through open and
distance learning.
Course Objectives
By the end of this course, you will be able to:
1. Apply philosophical thoughts on daily activities
2. Integrate philosophical thoughts in different field of study.
Working through this Course
To successfully complete this course, read the study units, listen to the audios
and videos, do all assessments, open the links and read, participate in
discussion forums, read the recommended books and other materials
provided, prepare your portfolios, and participate in the online facilitation.
Each study unit has introduction, intended learning outcomes, the main
content, conclusion, summary and references/further readings. The
introduction will tell you the expectations in the study unit. Read and note the
intended learning outcomes (ILOs). The intended learning outcomes tell you
what you should be able to do at the completion of each study unit. So, you
can evaluate your learning at the end of each unit to ensure you have
achieved the intended learning outcomes. To meet the intended learning
outcomes, knowledge is presented in texts, video and links arranged into
modules and units. Click on the links as may be directed but where you are
reading the text off line, you will have to copy and paste the link address into a
browser. You can download the audios and videos to view off line. You can
also print or download the texts and save in your computer or external drive.
The conclusion gives you the theme of the knowledge you are taking away
from the unit. Unit summaries are presented in downloadable audios and
videos.
There are two main forms of assessments – the formative and the summative.
The formative assessments will help you monitor your learning. This is
presented as in-text questions, discussion forums and Self-Assessment
Exercises.
The summative assessments would be used by the university to evaluate your
academic performance. This will be given as Computer Base Test (CBT)
which serve as continuous assessment and final examinations. A minimum of
three computer base test will be given with only one final examination at the
3
end of the semester. You are required to take all the computer base tests and
the final examination.
Study Units
There are 23 study units in this course divided into five modules. The
modules and units are presented as follows:
Module 1 An Overview of Philosophy
Unit 1 Definition and Scope of Philosophy
Unit 2 Methods of Philosophy
Unit 3 Branches of Philosophy
Unit 4 Philosophy and other Disciplines Contents
Unit 5 The Usefulness of Philosophy
Unit 6 Sources of Knowledge and Criteria for Knowing
Module 2 History and Development of Philosophy
Unit 1 The Ancient Age of Philosophy
Unit 2 Medieval and Renaissance Age of Philosophy
Unit 3 Modern Period of Philosophy
Unit 4 Philosophical Movements In The Contemporary Period
Unit 5 The Idea of African Philosophy
Module 3 Logic
Unit 1 Definition and Scope of Logic
Unit 2 Logic’s Vocabulary I
Unit 3 Logic’s Vocabulary Ii
Unit 4 Valid, Invalid, Deductive and Inductive Arguments
Unit 5 Language and Its Functions
Module 4 Fallacies and Definitions
Unit 1 Fallacies (Part One)
Unit 2 Fallacies (Part Two)
Unit 3 Definitions (Part One)
Unit 4 Definitions (Part Two)
Unit 5 Categorical Propositions Contents
Module 5 Argument Forms and Law of Thought
Unit 1 Argument Forms
Unit 2 Laws of Thought
References and Further Readings
Layman, C. 2002. The Power of Logic. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Neneye, E. P. 2003. Introduction to Logic and Philosophy. Owerri: Prosperity
Publishers.
4
Otakpor, Nkeonye. A Preface to Logic. Benin City: Omone Books, 2000.120
Copi, I.M. 1978. Introduction to Logic. New York: Macmillan.
Gorsky, D.P. 1974. Definitions. Moscow: Progress Publishers.
Howard. 1973. Logic and Philosophy-A Modern Introduction. 2nd ed.)
California: Wadsworth Publishing.
Plato. Five Dialogues. (Trans.) G.M.A. Grube. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1981.
Stebbing,
L.S. A Modern Introduction to Logic. London: Methuen, 1993.
Salmon. 1984 Logic. (3rd ed.) Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984. 86
Uduma, O. Uduma (2015). Logic and Critical Thinking, (2nd Edition) Ghana:
Africa Analytical Publications.
Copi, I.M. 1974. Introduction to Logic. New York: Macmillan.
Gorsky, D.P. 1974. Definitions. Moscow: Progress Publishers.
Kahane, H. 1973. Logic and Philosophy-A Modern Introduction. 2nd edition.
California: Wadsworth.
Plato. Five Dialogues. 1981. (Trans.) G.M.A.. Grube. Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett.
Stebbing, L.S. 1993. A Modern Introduction to Logic. London: Methuen, 1993.
Wesley, Salmon. 1984. Logic, 3rd edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Presentation Schedule
The presentation schedule gives you the important dates for the completion of
your computer-based tests, participation in forum discussions and
participation at facilitation. Remember, you are to submit all your assignments
at the appropriate time. You should guide against delays and plagiarisms in
your work. Plagiarisms is a criminal offence in academics and is highly
penalized.
Assessment
There are two main forms of assessments in this course that will be scored.
The Continuous Assessments and the final examination. The continuous
assessment shall be in three fold. There will be two Computer Based
Assessment. The computer-based assessments will be given in
accordance to university academic calendar. The timing must be strictly
5
adhered to. The Computer Based Assessments shall be scored a maximum
of 10% each, while your participation in discussion forums and your portfolio
presentation shall be scored maximum of 10% if you meet 75% participation.
Therefore, the maximum score for continuous assessment shall be 30%
which shall form part of the final grade.
The final examination for GST 203 will be maximum of two hours and it takes
70 percent of the total course grade. The examination will consist of 70
multiple choice questions that reflect cognitive reasoning.
Note: You will earn 10% score if you meet a minimum of 75% participation in
the course forum discussions and in your portfolios otherwise you will lose the
10% in your total score. You will be required to upload your portfolio using
Google Doc. What are you expected to do in your portfolio? Your portfolio
should be note or jottings you made on each study unit and activities. This
will include the time you spent on each unit or activity.
How to get the Most from the Course
To get the most in this course, you need to have a personal laptop and
internet facility. This will give you adequate opportunity to learn anywhere you
are in the world. Use the Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs) to guide your
self-study in the course. At the end of every unit, examine yourself with the
ILOs and see if you have achieved what you need to achieve.
Carefully work through each unit and make your notes. Join the online real
time facilitation as scheduled. Where you missed the scheduled online real
time facilitation, go through the recorded facilitation session at your own free
time. Each real time facilitation session will be video recorded and posted on
the platform.
In addition to the real time facilitation, watch the video and audio recorded
summary in each unit. The video/audio summaries are directed to salient part
in each unit. You can assess the audio and videos by clicking on the links in
the text or through the course page.
Work through all self-assessment exercises. Finally, obey the rules in the
class.
Facilitation
You will receive online facilitation. The facilitation is learner centred. The
mode of facilitation shall be asynchronous and synchronous. For the
asynchronous facilitation, your facilitator will:
• Present the theme for the week;
• Direct and summarise forum discussions;
• Coordinate activities in the platform;
• Score and grade activities when need be;
• Upload scores into the university recommended platform;
6
• Support you to learn. In this regard personal mails may be sent.
• Send you videos and audio lectures; and podcast.
For the synchronous:
• There will be eight hours of online real time contact in the course. This
will be through video conferencing in the Learning Management
System. The eight hours shall be of one-hour contact for eight times.
• At the end of each one-hour video conferencing, the video will be
uploaded for view at your pace.
• The facilitator will concentrate on main themes that are must know in
the course.
• The facilitator is to present the online real time video facilitation time
table at the beginning of the course.
• The facilitator will take you through the course guide in the first lecture
at the start date of facilitation.
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator. Contact your facilitator if you:
• do not understand any part of the study units or the assignment.
• have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises
• have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s
comments on an assignment.
Also, use the contact provided for technical support.
Read all the comments and notes of your facilitator especially on your
assignments, participate in the forums and discussions. This gives you
opportunity to socialise with others in the programme. You can raise any
problem encountered during your study. To gain the maximum benefit from
course facilitation, prepare a list of questions before the discussion session.
You will learn a lot from participating actively in the discussions.
Finally, respond to the questionnaire. This will help the university to know
your areas of challenges and how to improve on them for the review of the
course materials and lectures.
7
CONTENTS
Module 1 An Overview of Philosophy 9
Unit 1 Definition and Scope of Philosophy 9
Unit 2 Methods of Philosophy 16
Unit 3 Branches of Philosophy 21
Unit 4 Philosophy and other Disciplines Contents 28
Unit 5 The Usefulness of Philosophy 33
Unit 6 Sources of Knowledge and Criteria for Knowing 35
Module 2 History and Development of Philosophy 40
Unit 1 The Ancient Age of Philosophy 40
Unit 2 Medieval and Renaissance Age of Philosophy 48
Unit 3 Modern Period of Philosophy 52
Unit 4 Philosophical Movements in the Contemporary Period 59
Unit 5 The Idea of African Philosophy 65
Module 3 Logic 73
Unit 1 Definition and Scope of Logic 73
Unit 2 Logic’s Vocabulary I 79
Unit 3 Logic’s Vocabulary II 83
Unit 4 Valid, Invalid, Deductive and Inductive Arguments 88
Unit 5 Language and its Functions 94
Module 4 Fallacies and Definitions 100
Unit 1 Fallacies (Part One) 100
Unit 2 Fallacies (Part Two) 110
Unit 3 Definitions (Part One) 114
Unit 4 Definitions (Part Two) 119
Unit 5 Categorical Propositions Contents 126
Module 5 Argument Forms and Law of Thought 130
Unit 1 Argument Forms 130
Unit 2 Laws of Thought 134
8
Module 1 An Overview of Philosophy
Introduction
This module will introduce you to the nitty-gritty in philosophy. The module is
divided into six units as follows:
Unit 1 Definition and Scope of Philosophy
Unit 2 Methods of Philosophy
Unit 3 Branches of Philosophy
Unit 4 Philosophy and other Disciplines Contents
Unit 5 The Usefulness of Philosophy
Unit 6 Sources of Knowledge and Criteria for Knowing
Unit 1 Definition and Scope of Philosophy
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 What is Philosophy?
3.2 The Various Conceptions of Philosophy
3.2.1 The Under-LabourerConception of Philosophy
3.2.2 The Master Scientist Con Caption
3.2.3 Philosophy as Clarification of Concepts
3.2.4 Philosophy as The Love of Wisdom
3.2.5 Philosophy as The Search for Truth
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit introduces you to the definition and scope of philosophy as a
discipline. The unit will focus particularly on the controversial nature of the
definition or conception of philosophy, it will consider both the layman and
academics conceptions and understandings of philosophy.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Define philosophy as a discipline;
• Discuss the views about the conception of philosophy
9
3.0 Main Content
3.1 What Is Philosophy?
You need to know from the outset that: The term “Philosophy” lends itself to
many interpretations, thus the answer to this three-word question is not as
simple as it looks or sounds. And, because of the critical nature of the
discipline no one philosopher can define philosophy in a way that will be
acceptable to every philosopher. Unlike other disciplines such as economics,
history, political science, biology etc. where students can give a straight
forward definition of their respective discipline, this is not possible with
philosophy.
There is no such thing as the exact or univocal definition of philosophy. What
we have seen from history is that each philosopher defines philosophy from
his or her perspective or that each philosopher defines philosophy based on
what he or she perceives as the central problem(s) or what we may call the
subject matter of philosophy. Since there are many problems or issues that
philosophy grapples with, there are many definitions of philosophy. This may
be the reason why Bodunrin (1981: 12) advises a new comer into philosopher,
who wishes to define or know the meaning of philosophy, to always wait for
one as he would have to settle for one or achieve this by himself or herself
latter in the cause of his or her studying philosophy. Sometimes, it is often
argued that you define philosophy by doing philosophy. Although, this
approach may not be correct, because, it is not in all cases that you need to
practice something before you explain or understand it. For instance,
someone interested in the definition of death does not necessarily need to die
before he explains or understands it. If he is told that the only way to define
death is to die first, he is likely to give up the attempt. Even if the best way to
define philosophy is to expose you to the rigours of deep philosophizing, this
remains partial. What you should always have in mind is that when a student
of philosophy asks a question “what is Philosophy” he has started
philosophizing and to philosophize is to wonder about life and about the
fundamental issues that borders on human existence.
3.2 The Various Conceptions of Philosophy
The problem with a definition of philosophy also arises due to the various
‘conceptions’ and ‘misconceptions’, understanding and misunderstanding of
philosophy. Because of this, the discipline has been given various meanings
or definitions. This section focuses on the different conceptions or definitions
of the discipline from various groups or individual’s perspective. This begins
from professionals to the lay man and by ‘lay man’ I mean the average man
in-the-street
3.2.1 Under- labourer Conception
This is in another word called the popular conception of philosophy. In this
sense, the word philosophy is often used to characterize a person or a group
of persons' attitude to life. Attitude here means the general pattern or the
10
habitual way of response of the person to events. Also, attitude, in a more
developed sense, characterizes a person's expressed or observed world-
view, which may be the sum of his assumptions, beliefs, attitudes, and
prejudices which are partly inherited and partly acquired in the process of
living (Akinpelu, 1981 :2). In this sense everybody is a philosopher in so far as
everybody has a philosophy of life, that is, anattitude towards life. When we
claim to have a personal philosophy of life, it refers to either or both two
senses that we sometimes refer. Thus, why in the street you often heard
people saying, ‘My philosophy’, ‘His philosophy’, and so on. If you ask a
common man: “What is your philosophy of life”? You will get answers such as:
“My philosophy of life is to take things gently” or You can see here that when
we talk of a layman’s conception of philosophy, it simply means, the sum of a
person’s beliefs, the main principles that control and guide a person’s life.
This view also suggests that at least most human adults have necessarily
some philosophy of life, since it would be impossible to lead a human life
without some forms of beliefs and definite principles to guide those beliefs.
These includes among others various ideas about man and the supernatural
realities, such as God, Soul, Spirits which governs human life and world-view.
In Halverson view, this impression of philosophy is understood to have a very
practical orientation. And a philosophy of life… include views on such things
as the nature of man and man’s place in the universe, some convictions about
what things are worth for and so on (1967:4). In this conception, the term
philosophy also refers to the profound sayings of the elders which are witty
and pregnant with meanings. It is under-labourer because it does not capture
the sense in which philosophy is understood technically speaking.
You must also know that this conception of philosophy also includes what can
be regarded as the principle or ideology of an organization, group or
government or the ways of running an institution or organization; hence, we
talk of the philosophy of National Open University of Nigeria, (NOUN) and
people sometimes says “No one understands the philosophy of this
government” or “The party lacks any philosophical basis.”
3.2.2 The Master Scientist Conception of Philosophy
This conception of philosophy is itself the result of philosophical doctrine that
sees knowledge as exclusively depending on sense experience. Whatever
cannot be observed or is not subject to objective verification cannot constitute
knowledge.
In more recent times, this philosophical doctrine has come to be known as
scientism. This conception repudiates knowledge that is not based on
scientific method of enquiry. This impression or conception extols the
sciences and treats the Humanities like a vast debating society or subject
meant for those without serious academics or professional ambition. This
conception is further a product of a lopsided view of technology. Most people
tend to ascribe the credit for technological achievements to the physical
sciences, whereas, in fact, technological progress is due to a combination of
many aspects of human life including politics, law, education, art, commerce,
and philosophy. Lack of appreciation for this according to Onigbinde
11
(1999:20) has made many to assume that only science, and no other field -
can yield knowledge and understanding.
However, the implications and the inadequacies of this conception is not
farfetched. The implication of restricting human knowledge to human
experience is "half knowledge" or "lopsided knowledge". Reality goes beyond
experimental and observable. This explains why the empirical disciplines
cannot answer the question of purpose - why the universe exists in the first
place. It is incompetent to explain the ultimate purpose of our existence or of
the universe because of its empirical constraints but to argue that such
questions cannot be fruitfully investigated because they fall outside the ambits
of the empirical sciences is sheer intellectual dishonesty. Therefore, for us to
have a more comprehensive and all-embracing conception of philosophy, we
cannot afford to cage ourselves within the limited walls of experience and
observables.
3.2.3 Clarification of Concepts
In this conception, philosophy is reduced to the role of clarification of the
meaning of words and concepts. When we use such words like justice, good,
bad, beauty, ugliness, what do we mean? To the advocates of this
conception, the function of philosophy is to clarify the meaning of such words.
To them, philosophy is a specialized field serving the sciences and aiding in
the clarification of language rather than a broad field reflecting upon all of life's
experiences (Harold, 1964; 9).
Certainly, this is one function of philosophy and not the main task or the only
legitimate function of philosophy. To see it as the only legitimate function of
philosophy is to have a narrow conception of philosophy and therefore of
knowledge. This is because, it would limit what we call knowledge to
statements about observable facts and their interrelations - that is to the
business of the various sciences. But we know that knowledge generally used
is not the prerogative of the sciences. We know and do have knowledge of
ethical and theological principles and other value-laden theories. However,
other connotations of philosophy have been noted. In this vein, philosophy
has been variously conceived to be the Love for Wisdom, the Search for
Truth, the Rational Explanation of Nature, the Search for the Ideal Life, the
Concern with Human Experience and the Reminder of Familiar Facts of
Everyday experience.
3.2.4 Philosophy as the Love of Wisdom
This connotation of philosophy is derived from the etymological meaning of
philosophy. Etymologically, the word philosophy comes from the Greek words
Philos, Philia, Philein which means friend, love, to love and Sophia which
means wisdom. Philia refers to such concepts as friendliness, affection or any
such concept conducive to the establishment of friendship between persons.
On the other hand, Sophia as understood by Aristotle,refers to the highest
intellectual and especially philosophical excellence of which the human mind
is capable, and which is the result of studying nature for its own sake. In this
sense, it is translated theoretical wisdom (Onyeocha, 1996:8). Wisdom
12
consists in the constant and unwavering disposition to seek the truth.
Philosophy includes both the seeking of wisdom and the wisdom that is
sought.
However, wisdom as used here is different from, though not opposed to
knowledge in the sense of amassed information. This is because one could
be wise without having much knowledge, just as one could have a lot of
knowledge without being wise. Wisdom in the philosophical sense is a habit of
applying the intellect in a systematic way as a guide and a beacon in one's
activities. It is more a matter of temperament and character than of knowledge
(Ibid: 11). In this connotation, the distinguishing mark of the philosopher i.e.
friend or lover of wisdom, is the premium he or she places on the application
of the intellect at both the practical and theoretical levels of operation. A
philosopher in this connotation is therefore one who believes in the efficacy of
intellectual effort and who uses whatever knowledge he or she can command
to benefit mankind. Socrates, in his conversation with Phaedrus, gives his
criteria for ascribing wisdom to anyone, namely, an originality of thought and a
critical mind even about his or her own production. He says,
If the work had been done with knowledge of the truth. If he could defend his
statements when challenged and would demonstrate the inferiority of his own
writings out of his own mouth would be called, not wise, for that pertains to a
god, but a lover of wisdom (Phaedrus 278d).
In the Phaedrus, Socrates goes further to contrast true lovers of wisdom to
those who merely parade themselves as lovers of wisdom when in actual fact
they are mere lovers of words. He calls them copyists and writers of certain
types of poetry. The type of poetry that Socrates disparages here is the type
that manifests neither a profundity of thought nor a depth of content. Socrates
also excludes from the realm of true philosophers’ certain types of law writers
and speech writers who, in his words, have no other input than the
juxtaposition and rearrangement of words and phrases in existing works. He
calls them, “those who have nothing to show of more value than the literary
works on whose phrase they spend hours twisting them this way and that,
pasting them together and pulling them apart” (Phaedrus 278d).
3.2.5 Philosophy as the Search for Truth
There is no gainsaying the fact that philosophy and indeed philosophers have
a penchant for certain and indubitable knowledge. When Rene Descartes, a
mathematician, turned philosopher, declared his interest in philosophy, he
was looking for a certain and distinct knowledge - knowledge that can be
certain and distinct as mathematical truths are. The philosopher shuns the
mundane and the bizarre affairs of life and goes for the fundamental, the
originality, the unstuffy of all there is wherein the truth of reality lies. The
philosopher's penchant for the truth is best seen in the description of the
philosopher as given by the Greek thinker and mathematician Pythagoras (C.
600 BC), when he likened philosophers to spectators at the ancient games. In
the order of importance, the philosophers, whom he compared with the
spectators whose sole interest is the game itself, are superior to competitors
13
who are out to win prizes and commercials who were out to make money from
sales. Pythagoras had described himself as one who regards every aspect of
reality with thoughtful attention for achieving a clearer, distinct and more
comprehensive understanding. Therefore, when Leon the tyrant of Phlius
asked him who he was, Pythagoras replied, 'A philosopher', and went on to
compare life to the great games, where some went to compete for the great
games, where some went to compete for the prizes and others went with
wares to sell. In his assessment, the best among them all were those who
went as spectators, since their interest in the games is simply to relax and
enjoy it - and get the first-hand information, the nitty gritty of the game. He
compared the situation with the situation in real life where some grow up with
servile natures, and others are greedy for fame and gain. Unlike both classes
of people, the philosopher seeks for truth (Laertius, 1925: 11). The
philosopher's superiority over these other classes of people lies in his
constant disposition to spurn fame and profit and go for the truth.
4.0 Conclusion
Philosophy consists in the constant and unwavering disposition to seek the
truth. In the light of this, Plato defines philosophy as a man whose passion is
to seek the truth, a man whose heart is fixed on reality'. According to Aristotle,
philosophy is rightly called the knowledge of the truth'. It is not out of place
therefore to say that philosophy is synonymous with truth. Be that as it may,
given the various conceptions of philosophy as outlined above, we submit with
Omoregbe that philosophy is a rational search for answers to the questions
that arise in the mind when we reflect on human experience. It is also a
rational search for answers to the basic questions about the ultimate meaning
of reality and of human life.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Brush, G.S. “Physics: Philosophical Foundations”. Encyclopaedia Americana,
vol. 22. New York: Americana Corporation, 1973.
Copleston, F. A History of Philosophy. Vol. 1. New York: Image Books, 1962.
Konstantinous F.V., A. Bogamolov, et.al. The Fundamentals of Marxist –
Leninist Philosophy. Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1982.
14
Passmore J. “Philosophy”. The Encyclopaedia of Philosophy, Vol. 6. New
York: Macmillan and the Free Press, 1972.
Russell, B. A History of Western Philosophy. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1945.
15
Unit 2 Methods of Philosophy
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Contents
3.1 Socratic Method
3.2 Synthetic Method of Plato
3.3 Pragmatic Method
3.4 Skepticism
3.5 Empiricism and Rationalism
3.6 Kant’s Critical/Transcendental Method
3.7 Dialectical Method of Hegel
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
By method here, we refer to the way by which the act of philosophy can be
carried out. Thus, in this unit, you shall be examining the various ways by
which philosophical processes have been carried out from the time of
Socrates.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Explain the various methods in philosophy
• Demonstrate philosophical skills in evaluating how philosophers carry
out philosophical activities
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Socratic Method
The Socratic method of philosophical consists in arguing out the entire
process of the subject in question, in the manner of a dialogue. The prima
facie view is refuted by exposing the inconsistencies and contradictions
involved in accepting it as true. The teacher professes entire ignorance all
the while, finally getting the truth from the mouth of the questioner himself, by
the ingenious method of subtle examination, through the process of
questioning and analysis. This technique of argument is based on a complete
knowledge of the fundamental component elements of the subject of the
argument and their relation to the constitution and condition of the intellect
and reason of the opposite party concerned in the discussion. The Socratic
method can be summed up in the following processes: (1) The assumption of
an ignorance of truth by the teacher, which has been called the Socratic irony:
This attitude of intellectual humility and basing oneself on the most
16
fundamental of propositions in an argument is, as with Descartes, essential to
unravel the depths of truth. (2) The method of dialogue or conversation as an
effective technique in the discovery of truth: This is based on a grasp of the
presence of the knowledge of the true and the good in every person at the
bottom of his being, in spite of hasty conclusions that one may make
regarding things due to immature observations and pet prejudices. This
common ground of truth among men can be brought out to the surface by
careful analysis, argument and investigation, by question and answer. This is
often called the art of philosophic midwifery. (3) The establishment of correct
concepts or definitions before trying to know their application in life’s
instances. (4) The art of proceeding from the observed facts to more general
truths, i.e., adopting the inductive method of reasoning. The method of
Socrates is also deductive in the sense that it draws out the consequences
and implications of certain concepts and judges their validity.
3.2 Synthetic Dialectic Method of Plato
The analytical method of Socrates was followed by the synthetic dialectic of
Plato, which concerned itself with discovering the causal relation between
thought and being. Plato’s dialectic method mostly consisted in the grouping
of scattered particulars into a single concept or idea and the dissection of this
concept or idea into classes, i.e., the generalisation and arrangement of the
idea. The arriving at a fact depends on the establishment of a correct concept
or notion or principle. It is not possible to know, for example, what the true is
or who a good man is, unless we first settle in our knowledge the nature of
truth and goodness.
3.3 Pragmatic Method
According to the pragmatic method, everything is real when it tends to fruitful
activity and results. The character of fulfilling the primal interests of man
should be the guiding principle in philosophy. Human interest is the
touchstone of philosophical endeavour, of all activity—physical, mental, moral
or spiritual. Values are to be judged by results, and the test of truth is
workability.
3.4 Skepticism
Philosophy is said to have begun with wonder. The marvel of creation evokes
the admiration of man, and its mysteriousness excites his wonder; and this
wonder naturally leads to a serious enquiry into the nature of things, given
this, man became curious to know the truth behind the interesting wonder of
the world. He investigates, speculates, argues and discusses, and comes to a
settled opinion of the nature of things in this wonderful world. This becomes
his philosophy. Modern man, however, seems to have stepped into the region
of philosophy through doubt and skeptical thinking. Man commenced doubting
the validity of authority and dogma no less than that of accepted traditional
beliefs. Descartes readily comes to mind in this form of method. Descartes
started with doubting everything, even the validity of thought itself. Later,
Kant, too, followed the critical method of enquiry in philosophy. Bradley was of
17
the opinion that the chief need of philosophy is “a skeptical study of first
principles.” However, he adds: “By skepticism is not meant doubt about or
disbelief in some tenet or tenets. It is an attempt to become aware and to
doubt all preconceptions and the essence is to ensure certainty in the
process.”
3.5 Empiricism and Rationalism
Empiricism as a method of philosophy is mainly confined to sense-
experience. It urges that all knowledge obtained by the senses is of what is
already existent outside themselves and that reason has its function in
carefully judging the nature of the perceptive material provided to it by the
senses. The laws of reason, according to empiricism, are copies of and
controlled by knowledge which is posteriori. No a priori knowledge in the
sense of what rationalism contends to be present in reason is ever possible.
Rational concepts are by-products of the experiential material. The source of
knowledge is sense-experience and not mind or reason. The method of
acquiring knowledge is inductive. Ideas are reducible to sensations.
Knowledge cannot be gained by merely finding that the opposite, which is
inconceivable, as rationalism holds, and truth cannot be established by the
fact that to deny it implies, somehow, its reaffirmation. A priori knowledge
independent of sense-experience is inconceivable. There are, therefore, no
universal and necessary self-evident truths that are adumbrated by
rationalism. So, goes the bold empiricism.
However, you need to know that this method has a defect. The defect of
empiricism lies in the fact that the senses are untrustworthy as means of right
knowledge. Therefore, we talk about appearance and reality in philosophy.
The point is that things are sometimes not the way they appear to us Sense-
precepts have being or reality only in relation to the constitutions of the
respective senses, and never independently.
The method of rationalism takes reason to be the sole means of acquiring
philosophical knowledge. According to it, the objective universe is known,
arranged and controlled by the a priori laws of reason. The universe is
considered an expression of the innate rational nature of the knowing subject.
The criterion of truth is not sensory but intellectual, rational and deductive.
This form of method is the mathematical methods. True knowledge is a priori
and is independent of sense-experience. This knowledge is self-evident, and
so it implies universal and necessary truths. But the point against this position
is that rationalism taken exclusively, cannot escape the charge of being non-
critical regarding its own position. How can the rationalist be sure that what he
knows through his rational powers is uncontradicted knowledge?
3.6 Kant’s Critical/Transcendental Method
The critical or transcendental method of philosophy employed by Kant takes
stock of the arguments of empiricism and rationalism and builds a new system
of tremendous importance in the history of philosophic thought. Kant follows
the method of the analysis of the conditions and limits of knowledge. He
18
points out that, though the material of our knowledge is supplied by the
senses, the universality and the necessity about it comes from the very nature
and constitution of the understanding, which is the knower of all things in the
world. But the world which we thus know through synthetic a priori knowledge
is not the real world, for, it is built by the materials supplied by the senses,
which gain the characters of universality and necessity when they are brought
into shape by the categories provided by the understanding. The world of
reality cannot be known by the powers that man possesses at present. If we
had been endowed with a consciousness-in-general or an intellectual intuition
uninfluenced by the judgments and categories of the understanding, it would
have been possible for us to know the reality as such; but as this kind of
consciousness is not possessed by us, we cannot know reality. What we
know are just empirical facts or phenomena constructed by precepts and
concepts common to all men. The postulates of reality that reason advances
are only necessities felt by it and not realities in themselves.
3.7 Dialectical Method of Hegel
Kant’s critical method was taken much further and completed by Hegel in a
staggering system of idealism built by means of what he termed the dialectical
method. This method of Hegel consists in the constructive dialectical process
of opposition and reconciliation. Thesis, antithesis and synthesis are its
moments. The existence of the finite and its assertion of itself as such is the
thesis. This thesis naturally evokes the existence and assertion of the finite
that is its opposite. This is its antithesis. The relation between the thesis and
the antithesis implies a reconciliation of these two in a higher synthesis
brought about by the evolving force of the Whole, which transcends the
isolated factors of the existence and the assertion of the thesis and the
antithesis. This reconciliation results in the cooperation of the thesis and the
antithesis and in a blend of the existence and the assertion of the unity of the
synthesis. Then this synthesis itself becomes a thesis to which there is an
antithesis. The two again get unified and transcended in a still higher
synthesis. This process of dialectical unification in higher and higher
syntheses continues in various grades, progressively, until the Absolute is
reached, where all contradiction is finally and fully reconciled.
4.0 Conclusion
The true philosophic method should not be lopsided, should not be biased to
any or special dogma, but comprehend within itself the processes of reflection
and speculation and at the same time be able to reconcile the deductive and
the inductive methods of reasoning.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
19
Video https://youtu.be/sdMZJHLkphA
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Ewing, A.C. The Fundamental Questions of Philosophy. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1951.
Titus, H.H., et al. Living Issues in Philosophy. California: Wadsworth
Publishing Company.
20
Unit 3 Branches of Philosophy
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Logic
3.2 Metaphysics
3.3 Epistemology
3.4 Ethics
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study introduces you to the major branches of philosophy. It is an
opportunity for you to know the divisions and sub-divisions within philosophy.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Classify philosophy
• Differentiate the different branches of philosophy.
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Logic
You should always remember that whenever you asked, “what is Logic? It
does not have a straight forward answer, which means no straightforward
answer can be given to that question. Logic has been variously defined by
different scholars. Copi for instance, defines “logic as the study of the
methods and principles used in distinguishing good (correct) from bad
(incorrect) reasoning” (1972). On the other hand, Nancy sees Logic “as the
science that appraises reasoning as correct or incorrect” (1990:34). Kahane
on his part defines logic as “an attempt to distinguish between correct (valid)
and incorrect (invalid) arguments” (1968:2). According to DipoIrele (1999: 12)
Logic is that “branch of philosophy that deals with the structure and principles
of reasoning or sound argument.” To Ade Ali, (2003:5), “Logic is a reflective
study that provides the canons for judging and evaluation of correct
reasoning…it is also the study of the principles of reasoning especially of the
structure of proposition as distinguished from their content and of method and
validity in deductive reasoning.” What is common to all the above and other
definitions of logic is that logic is not a clever way of dogging issues using a
cunny means but rather it is a systematic expository study of how human
beings ought to think if they are to reason correctly. It is the study of how to
21
ensure that your reasoning conforms to fundamental principles that governs
correct reasoning.
Etymologically, logic as a discipline derives from the Greek word Logos, which
means “Reasoned discourse.” Its fundamental meaning is speech or
statement in the sense that each speech or statement consists of coherent
and rational arrangement of words. It is a tool for valid reasoning and
essential weapon for philosophical reflection and for the separation of correct
reasoning from the incorrect reasoning. You need to know that logic is an
instrumental branch of philosophy. In point of fact, always remember that logic
is the tool of philosophizing. Logic enables philosophers to make their
arguments well stated and persuasive more than other people do. It also
enables philosophers to make their position clear, well-articulated and to
properly backed up their pronouncements rational, their reasoning precise,
cogent and coherent.
The logician is most concerned with argument which can be described as a
string of statement that can simply be divided into two parts namely
premise(s) and conclusion. The premise(s) is also known as reason or
reasons for the conclusion, while the conclusion is the claim that is been
supported by the reasons. Before we go further, you must note that there two
forms of argument, they are Simple argument and complex argument. A
simple argument is one that contains one, two or three ideas. Normally, such
arguments consist of two or three statements as premises with another
sentence as conclusion. Example
1. Only students of National Open University of Nigeria study GST 203
Ambali studies GST 203.
Therefore, Ambali is a student of National Open University of Nigeria
2. All metals conduct electricity
Copper is a metal
Consequently, copper conducts electricity
You will observe from each of the above arguments, the claim (conclusion) is
inferred (follow) from one or more of the premises. And in each case, there is
a logical connection between the premises and the conclusion.
The second argument is a complex argument. This form of argument consists
of as many arguments as possible with so many premises and conclusion(s).
Complex argument could take various patterns like seminar paper, debate, a
write-up. Structurally, a complex argument normally has a theme, with so
many premises and conclusion(s).
Example:
There are two ways of dealing with criminals. Either rehabilitate them or
punish them. Rehabilitation is not a viable option for the following reasons:
One, the cost of rehabilitation has sky-rocketed. Two, rehabilitation is not
effective: it does not deter criminals or would be criminals. Three, there are
22
conflicting methods of rehabilitation. Four, prisoners seem to be getting too
good a lifestyle for what they have done. I suggest therefore that we should
use the other option, that is, punish them (Achilike, 2010:18).
From this example, you will notice that identifying a complex argument
involves a complex reasoning. But you will notice the following when you
compare it with the simple sentence that you have read earlier.
1. It has very many major (claims) premises
2. It has mini-premises supporting each or some of the major
premises
3. It has major conclusion, that is major theme or position being
defended
4. It has additional supporting claims or auxiliary evidences for the
position being defended.
What you learn from the above and which you must always remember is that
any argument must have premises and conclusion. For your argument to be
good or correct, your premise(s) must provide support to the conclusion. And
the conclusion of any argument must follow or be inferred from the premises.
When we talk of argument in philosophy, there are basically two types of
argument and these are Deductive argument and Inductive argument. So, in a
way we can say that logic is the study of the criteria of differentiating correct
from incorrect arguments.In logic, an argument is deductive when the
conclusion follows from its premises with absolute necessity or certainty.
Deduction is the process of moving from the general to the specific. In other
words, in logic we deduce when we move from a proposition describing a
condition that holds in all instances to an instance. The above examples are
examples of deductive arguments.
However, inductive arguments are those in which the premises do not lead to
the conclusion with certainty. Induction is based on “probability”. For instance,
when you say, “Most NOUN student are dark in complexion, Yisa is a NOUN
student, therefore Yisa is dark in complexion.” Here the word ‘most’ does not
entail all the NOUN students. Therefore, one cannot conclude with certainty
that Yisa is dark in complexion. Yisa could be among the few NOUN students
that is not dark in complexion. You can see that there is no necessity in this
conclusion. Probability is what characterizes it.
3.2 Epistemology
Epistemology is also one of the traditional branches of philosophy.
Etymologically, it derives from two Greek words Episteme which means
“knowledge” and logos which means “science of study, discourse or
reasoning” Put together, epistemology is the study or the science of
knowledge. It is the branch of philosophy which investigates the scope,
source and limitations of human knowledge. In this branch of philosophy, the
philosopher wishes to know what knowledge means. Is knowledge different
from opinion and belief? Thus, epistemology tries to discover what knowledge
is and how it differs from mere opinion or belief. It examines what constitutes
23
belief and what constitute knowledge? How does knowledge differ from
belief? What does it mean to know and how do humans know what they claim
to know? What can we know? Can we know anything with certainty or must
we be certified with mere guess and opinion? Is there any limit to what we can
know? What is the relation between knowledge and reality? Does all
knowledge of the real world arise out of experience or do we have knowledge
that is in some degree independent of experience? You must know that the
recent trends in epistemological discourse have left these traditional problems
of epistemology to the problem of epistemological justification. Hence, the
question now borders on, how do we justify our claim to knowledge? There
are however, some schools of thoughts in epistemology that you must know.
The two school that will be mentioned here among others are the Sceptics
and the foundationalists. The sceptics deny our ability to know anything for
certain while the foundationalists believe on certain foundation upon which the
superstructure of knowledge can be built.
3.3 Metaphysics
This has been defined as the science of being as being. ‘Being qua tale’. This
is the branch of philosophy that studies reality in its most comprehensive
scope and fundamental principles. It is the science that tries to determine the
real nature of things. For Plato it is the knowledge of the supra-sensible,
therefore, real being existent in the ideal world and therefore explanatory of
the realities of this transient world. According to Aristotle, all other disciplines
study “aspects of reality or being, but none of them concerns itself with the
study of being as such” (Mann, 1966:18). However, there must be a science
of being, “a science of the first things or of the most real” (Mann,
1966:16).Indeed, the science of being would be the most basic for in a sense
all other special sciences presupposed it” (Mann, 1966:16). That science
according to Aristotle is Metaphysics. In his view, metaphysics studies the
totality of things in the universe both the possible and the real, the visible and
the invisible. Metaphysics is a general study of existence and reality. For
Rene Descartes, it is the knowledge of things which lies beyond this sense
experience. While for Thomas Aquinas, it is the ultimate explanation of the
mystery of being visible and invisible, in the ultimate Being (causal and final)
which is God.
The word metaphysics is derived from the Greek word meta-ta-physika, which
means ‘after the physics.’ The word first used by Andronicus of Rhodes
(around 70 B.C.), a commentator on Aristotle’s works. He used the term to
describe Aristotle’s works which came after the discussions on the physical
sciences. It was recorded that Aristotle wrote a series of books dealing with
nature which he himself called “the physics”. However, decades after
Aristotle’s death Andronicus decided to sort through his works and gave them
titles. When Andronicus reached the batch of writings that followed “the
physics” he did not know what to call them, so he invented a word
“metaphysics”. This means that the Greek word ‘meta’, ‘after’ also means
beyond. In this sense, metaphysics means that which is beyond the ‘physical
eye’ It discusses such problems as the problem of substance, appearance
and reality, essence and existence, freewill and determinism, human destiny,
24
and many more. Various questions that are generated by metaphysicians
includes the following among other ones: Why something instead of nothing?
Is reality one or many?” Is the universe self-caused or does it involve the
concept of a creator? What is the transcendent origin and foundation of this
existence? Is reality essentially spiritual or material? Do persons have minds
distinct from their bodies? What is mind? Is it a series of experiences? What is
matter? Which is primary? What are their relationships? Are men free? Does
God exist? What is the divine? If you look deep into these questions, you will
discover that the answers lie beyond the boundaries of our experience. This
simply means that the criterion for settling such question is not empirical
possibility, but freedom from logical contradiction.
You should also bear in mind that even if Aristotle is considered as the
founding father ofmetaphysics as a science of reality he was not the first to
raise metaphysical problems. Metaphysics as an intellectual enterprise dates
back to the pre-Socratic philosophers such as Thales, Anaximander,
Anaximenes as well as Pythagoras, Parmenides and Heraclitus. The concern
of these philosophers was the search for the primary stuff of the universe.
They were also concerned with determining the ultimate constitutive elements
and grounds for the unity of things.
3.4 Ethics
Ethicsis mostly known as “the branch of philosophy which deals with the
morality of human actions in society” (Omoregbe, 1989:2). Etymologically
ethics derived from the Greek word Ethos which means “custom” or
“character”- it is a customary or acceptable way of acting. It is the philosophy
of the morality of human conduct. Sometimes it is called “moral philosophy”. It
is the branch of philosophy that concerns itself with right, or wrong, and other
issues related to evaluating human action. And you should always remember
that Socrates was the first to systematize the discipline. He was the first to
claim that “the unexamined life is not worth living”. Socrates devoted all his life
to a critical examination of human behaviour. He was the first to confess that
“the only thing I know is that I know nothing”. In his opinion, ethics is also
referred to as the science of human conduct”. It is the philosophical study of
the so-called moral facts: namely such things as moral evaluations,
commandments, norms, virtuous acts, the manifestations of conscience
(Brugger:117) |. It in addition, a philosophical study of voluntary human action,
with the purpose of determining what types of activity are good, right and to
be done, or bad, wrong and to be avoided, so that humans may live well.
Thus, ethics is the philosophical study of the activities that secure the good
life for man. Its concern is with judgments of approval or disapproval,
rightness or wrongness, goodness or badness, virtue or vice, desirability or
otherwise of human actions or state of affairs (Idowu: 2010:11). Ethics
compare what you do and what you ought to do. Ethics is not primarily
concerned with facts or the “is”, but rather with the “ought”. In other words,
ethics is not interested in the ontic but in the ontological question. Thus, the
focus on the “ought” as primary mission is what differentiates ethics from
other disciplines. You should also know that ethics is divided into descriptive,
prescriptive or normative, and meta-ethics.
25
*Descriptive Ethics
The duty of descriptive ethics is to examine the moral views held by human
beings or the society and to confirm whether these views are universal or not.
In Udoidem’s words: “The study of human actions centres on the description
of … How human beings behave or act without actually making value
judgments or prescribing what human beings should or should not do”
(1992:70).
*Normative or Prescriptive Ethics
The main duty of normative ethics is to prescribe what ought to be both for
humans and society. In other words, it prescribes that criteria for human
actions properly be judged as morally good or bad.
*Meta-Ethics
It is the part of ethics that deals with the logic and language of ethical
concepts and terms. In other words, meta-ethics is mostly concerned with the
elucidation or description and implication of ethical terms such as “good”,
“bad”, “right” “wrong”, “ought”, etc. It works hand in hand with normative
ethics. As a normative discipline, ethics deals with questions such as: How do
humans ought to behave?” What is morality? What is the nature of moral
responsibility? What is the definition of good? What is the chief goal for which
all men should strive? Is it accumulation of wealth or is it pleasure or
happiness? Has man any final end? Is there any real difference between
morally right and wrong actions? Or is it merely a matter of feeling? What is
the role of punishment? Are moral judgments on what we ought to do
objective or subjective or are they arbitrary?
4.0 Conclusion
The core branches of philosophy are logic, meta-physics, epistemology and
ethics. These branches are characterised by their characteristics.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video 1 https://youtu.be/eEFylNbfWgc
Video 2 https://youtu.be/HYV9BqnC4X4
Audio
26
6.0 References/Further Reading
Ayer, A.J. The Problem of Knowledge. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1956.
Bahm, A.J. Epistemology: Theory of Knowledge. New Mexico: Archie J. Bahm
Publisher, 1995.
Copi, J.M. Introduction to Logic. 5 edition. New York: Macmillan, 1978.
Edward, P. Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol. 182. New York: Macmillan and
Free Press, 1967.
Omoregbe, J. Ethics: A Systematic and Historical Study. Lagos: Cepco
Communications Systems Ltd, 1989.
Udoidem, S.I. Understanding Philosophy. Lagos: African Heritage Research
and Publications, 1992.
27
Unit 4 Philosophy and other Disciplines Contents
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Philosophy and science
3.2 Philosophy and Religion
3.3 Philosophy and Education
3.5 Philosophy and Law
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Beside the four traditional branches of philosophy that you have learned
above, there are other branches of philosophy which are often referred to as
the philosophy of the infrastructure of disciplines. This study unit introduces
you to the analysis of the relationship between philosophy and some other
disciplines. Bearing in mind that there is no discipline per se that does not
stem from philosophy as parent discipline (Unit 3), the focus in this unit will be
specifically on the relationship between philosophy, the sciences, religion,
education and law.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to apply philosophical thoughts in
analysing the relationship between philosophy, science, religion, education
and law.
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Philosophy and Science
You should bear in mind that until late 16 and early 19 centuries all scientific
knowledge was within the ambit of philosophical inquiry. In other words,
philosophy was the “science” per excellence. But according to Archie J.
Bahm: As reflections upon problems became increasing, complex and as
special techniques were developed, specialists limited the range of these
inquiries, and the sciences were born. Among the first were mechanics,
mathematics and astronomy. Among the latest were psychology and
sociology. The romance of the maturing of these offspring of the fecund
mother must be left to the history of science (1995:10).
The Nature of Scientific Knowledge
Unlike philosophy, science is best known as “an exact discipline”. In line with
this, The Oxford Advanced Dictionary also defines science as “knowledge
28
arranged in an orderlymanner, especially knowledge obtained by observation
and testing of facts….” ForFrolov, the nature of scientific knowledge goes
beyond this “positivist” definition. According to him, science is also “the field of
research directed towards obtaining further knowledge of nature, society and
thought”… It (science) is not limited to natural or exact sciences. Science is
an integral system with its components flexibly correlated in history, study of
nature, study of society, natural science (1984:372).
There is no doubt that science stemmed from philosophy. It is also true that
as a discipline, science bears some specific characteristics different from
philosophy. According to Harold H. Titus, scientific knowledge can be defined
as: A system of man’s understanding of nature, society and thought. It reflects
the world in concepts, categories and laws whose truth is verified by practical
experience. Science is the study of the totality of the concrete spheres of
material reality. It is concerned to investigate and establish objective laws of
nature by forming working hypothesis by which man may be enabled to
harness nature to his purposes and transform his environment (1997:65).
From the above definition of science, it should be clear to you that the main
purpose of science as discipline is to observe, understand natural phenomena
and then control processes. To any scientist it is assumed that the universe,
the orderly and natural phenomena are predictable and lawful.
Convergences and Divergences between Philosophy and Science
Always remember that it is improper to consider philosophy and science as
competitors. Even though science originated from philosophy as a discipline
their subject matter is different. The scientist main business is to explain
natural phenomena, while a philosopher does not intend to do so. An average
scientist always seeks for explanation while the philosopher basically seeks
for justification. You should also know that the two main scientific purposes
are prediction and control over phenomena. There are also six steps
procedures in any scientific inquiry which one cannot avoid. These are:
observation, inductive generalization, hypothesis, attempted verification
ofhypothesis, proof or disproof and knowledge. Thus, prediction and
control based on the laws of induction are what makes science not only
original but also different from philosophy. As academic disciplines, their
methodologies are quite different.
The philosopher’s inquiry begins where that of the scientist stops. It may be
difficult for a scientist to answer philosophical questions. Philosophy operates
at a different level. A scientist cannot answer philosophical questions such as:
is the world divided into mind and matter or is it possessed of independent
power”. Is the mind subject to matter or is it possessed of independent
power? Has the universe any unity or purpose? Is it evolving towards some
goal? Are there really laws of nature or do we believe in them only because of
our inmate love of order? Does God exist? You can see that none of these
questions can find answer in the scientist’s laboratory. You should also bear
in mind that even though the kind of knowledge that the scientist and
philosopher seek is different, the purpose of their disciplines is often similar.
29
Because both of them are motivated by sheer curiosity and the satisfaction of
having knowledge of the universe purely for the pleasure of the
understanding.
3.2 Philosophy and Religion
The purposes of philosophy and religion are fundamentally opposed. A
philosopher is always critical while a religionist is not. For a religionist, the role
of reason is basically one of interpreting and defending the dogma derived
from sources whose authority and truth is taken on faith. While any serious
philosopher begins his investigations from a position of intellectual neutrality
regardless of where his personal sympathies may lie. In philosophy, any
known assumption is subject to critical scrutiny. While religion is purely
dogmatic. In religion knowledge is sought principally to achieve what a given
religion takes to be human kind’s final happiness or destiny. While in
philosophy, knowledge is sought simply for its own sake. Philosophy often
questions the assumptions of religion.
You should also know that the purposes of philosophy should not be confused
with those of the religious minister, the theologians, the psycho-analyst,
pastors and imams. A philosopher is not a magician. Critical reasoning,
neutrality and the desire for knowledge for its own sake are the basic
concerns of a philosopher. It is in this sense that philosophy is very different
from religion.
3.3 Philosophy and Education
This minor branch of philosophy refers to the study of the fundamental
principles of the theory of education as distinguished from the science or art of
education. That is, the empirical study of educational process and the
techniques or methods of educational practice. For instance, to the
pragmatists, the philosophy of education principally deals with values and
goals of education which include the nature of humans as capable of being
educated, the agent by which education is achieved, the characteristics of a
truly educated person, the trained abilities acquired in education which help
one to solve practical problems of life and control of his environment.
In this branch of philosophy, the philosopher examines the concept of
education and what it means to educate and how best it can be achieved. He
looks at stages involved in education and what the goals of ideal education
are.
3.4 Philosophy and Law
The function philosophy performs in law is that it studies the nature of law and
philosophical principles of law and justice with reference to the origin and the
end of the civil law and the principles that should govern its formulation. A
critical and philosophical look at law in its generality is the function of a
discipline called jurisprudence which, as understood by lawyers, denote a
working knowledge of a particular system of law with reference to the exercise
30
of private and public decision-making functions and scholarly critiques of the
resulting actions. According to Pizzorni, there are three classifications of the
main object of philosophy of law and these are:
1. the universal concept of law, that is its essential features which
must be present in every juridical system
2. the foundation of law from which every legal system derives its
origin and values.
3. The standard or criteria with which all existing laws are guided and
evaluated, for the problem of the evaluation of law of law is the
problem of the philosophy of law. (curled from Omoregbe,
1994:173)
Philosophy of law differs from the science of law. While the science of law
deepens man’s knowledge of laws or legal system, the philosophy of law
broadens man’s horizon and opens the human mind to see that there is more
to the reality of law and legal experience than can be seen through the
empirical study of law.
4.0 Conclusion
Philosophy share relationship with other field of study such as science,
religion, education and law.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/Q-mntt1ROak
Audio
31
6.0 References/Further Reading
Bahm, A.J. What is Philosophy? New Mexico: World Books, 1995.
Fadahunsi, A & Adegboyega, O.O (eds.) 2010, Introduction to Philosophy and
CriticalThinking, Ago-Iwoye: Directorate of the General Studies, Olabisi
Onabanjo University.
Momoh, C. S. 1991. Philosophy of A New Past and An Old Future. Auchi:
African Philosophy Project Publications.
Frolov, I. Dictionary of Philosophy. Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1984.
Titus, H.H. Living Issues in Philosophy. California: Wadsworth Publishing
Company, 1997.
Warren, C.Y. A Christian Approach to Philosophy. Grand Rapid: Baker Book
House, 1954.
32
Unit 5 The Usefulness of Philosophy
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study is to introduce to you the usefulness of philosophy. It is an
opportunity for you to know how useful philosophy is to human kinds and the
environment. The usefulness of philosophy as discussed here will enhance
your understanding of philosophy as distinguished from those who conceive it
as an abstract contemplation and romance with the unreal far removed from
practical living.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to analyse philosophy in terms of its
usefulness and concept.
3.0 Main Content
The Usefulness of Philosophy
You need to know that those who conceive philosophy as an intellectually
complex and as an abstract contemplation that is far removed from practical
living, do not see any meaningfulness or relevance in philosophical enterprise.
However, philosophy is both mentally and practically relevance to human
kinds.
One of the usefulness of philosophy is that it helps to foster or develop the
habit of reflections and thus further help us to enlarge the areas of our
awareness to become more alive, more discerning, more critical, and to be
more enlightened. The age in which we live is an age of uncertainty and
change, when many of the older beliefs and the ways of doing things are
inadequate. When this is the situation, we need a scale of values and a sense
of direction. Philosophy provides this sense of direction. It provides us with a
unity of outlook and response to the reality of the world in which we live and
operate. It provides us with the parameters for discernment and for judging
issues and articulating problems intelligently and critically.
Philosophy in the intellectual realm trains one to think clearly, critically and
independently. Through, philosophy one can develop analytical abilities with
which one can effectively handle both practical and abstract issues.
33
At moral level, it helps to provide insight in distinguishing among values and to
identify for oneself what is best and most relevant. It enables one to
distinguish which human behaviour is good, moral, acceptable and
praiseworthy as against those that are bad, immoral, unacceptable and
condemnable.
As a professional in any field, philosophy provides the intellectual background
helpful to success. It challenges one to come up with one’s own effective
ways of solving problems that do not have readymade answer. Furthermore, it
helps in the rationalization and organization of results of human inquiry,
religion historical and scientific into consistent view world
4.0 Conclusion
Some persons hold the view that philosophy is an abstract and believe that
philosophy has no practical relevance to humankind. But the usefulness of
philosophy in the various field of study make the assertion to be untrue.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/F-ykSJRf4Bs
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Bahm, A.J. What is Philosophy? New Mexico: World Books, 1995.
Fadahunsi, A & Adegboyega, O.O (eds.) 2010, Introduction to Philosophy and
Critical Thinking, Ago-Iwoye: Directorate of the General Studies, Olabisi
Onabanjo University.
Odimegwu, I, Ndianefoo, I. & Agbanusi, A., Primer on Philosophy and Logic,
Awka: AFAB Education books, 2009.
34
Unit 6 Sources of Knowledge and Criteria for Knowing
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Difference between knowledge, opinion and belief
3.1.1 Common-sense understanding of knowledge, opinion
and belief
3.1.2 Philosophical understanding of knowledge, opinion
and belief
3.2 Sources of knowledge
3.2.1 Reason
3.2.2 Sense experience
3.2.3 Intuition
3.2.4 Authority
3.2.5 Revelation and faith.
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit introduces you to the different sources and criteria for knowing.
It is an opportunity for you to differentiate between common sense and
philosophical understanding of knowledge, belief and opinion. The different
sources of knowledge will be emphasized.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Differentiate between knowledge, opinion and belief.
• Discuss the common sense and philosophical understanding of
knowledge, opinion and belief. Identify the different sources of
knowledge.
• Discuss the criteria for knowledge.
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Difference between Knowledge, Opinion and Belief
Often, the terms knowledge, opinion and belief are used interchangeably and
when considered at the surface level, it ordinarily looks as if there is no
difference among them. In the daily life, it is easy for someone to say he
“knows” when he should say he “believes”. On the other hand, he “believes”
when he should say he “knows”. It is important to know that like philosophy,
the question of knowledge is not an easy one. It is not easy to align our
thoughts with reality. Our mind is always puzzled when it comes to adjusting
35
our beliefs to the knowledge of things in the world, so that our beliefs become
grounded in evidence. Therefore, the relationship and the difference between
knowledge, opinion and belief depend on the person’s position.
3.1.1 Common-sense Understanding of Knowledge, Opinion and Belief
As stated earlier, often knowledge, opinion and belief are used
interchangeably. This confusion mostly appears in common sense usage. To
a layman knowledge implies many things. For instance, knowledge can even
be synonymous with acquaintance. When a layman asks a question such as:
“Do you know the Vice – Chancellor of the National Open University of
Nigeria?” In his mind this question is the same as “are you acquainted with
the Vice-Chancellor?” However, the truth is that you might know the Vice-
Chancellor in the sense of being acquainted with him without knowing much
about him. On the other hand, it is also possible to know a great deal about
some other person which you have never met. For instance, as a student of
philosophy, you know a great deal about Plato, but I am sure that you never
met him. Also, in daily life, some people say they “know” while they mean
“believe” or “think”. For instance, when a layman says that a medicine is good.
What he has in mind is “think” because he might have some authoritative
persons saying it that ‘that medicine is good’. Most of the time we hear people
saying that they “know” that
Black men are cursed, nothing good can come out of them. They “know” that
things will never work well for them. In the above statements there is an
obvious confusion between knowledge, opinion and belief. And, this is what
happens in the daily life of a layman.
3.1.2 Philosophical Understanding of Knowledge, Opinion and Belief
The philosophical understanding of knowledge is very different from that of
the layman. For a layman, knowledge, opinion and belief are interwoven. But
it is not possible in philosophy. For a philosopher, you say “know” when you
possess information that is beyond doubt and the information is also true.
Philosophical knowledge follows the logic of proposition. i.e. “I know that…”
for example, “I know that Nigeria is the most populated country in Africa”. “I
know that Cameroon and Nigeria are neighbours”. According to John
Hospers, if we take the letter “X” to stand for any proposition, some
requirements must be met in order for us to assert, truly that we know “X”: “X”
must be true”, “We must have evidence for ‘X’, that is, reason to believe ‘X’,
“Not only must ‘X’ be true, we must believe that ‘X’ is true”, “There must be no
counter – evidence”. Hospers adds that: the moment you have some reasons
to believe that a proposition is not true, this immediately negates a person’s
claim to know it. You cannot know ‘X’ if X is not true. If I say I know ‘X’, but ‘X;
is not true, my statement is self – contradicting for part of what is involved in
knowing ‘X’ is that ‘X’ is true (1956:144).
According to him, “there may be numerous statements that you believe but do
not know to be true, but there can be none, which you know to be true but
don’t believe... for believing is a defining characteristic of knowing. But
36
believing ‘X’ is not a defining characteristic of ‘X’ being true. ‘X’ can be true
even though neither he nor I nor anyone believes it. After all, the earth was
round even before anyone believed that it was (1956:145).
What matters here is that knowledge implies being sure, being certain. Also,
believing is a pre-condition for knowledge. Because, when you know
something, you have a right to a certain confidence in your belief as a true
and reliable guide to action. Thus, you cannot say you know something which
you are not sure of. But it is possible to believe something you are not sure of.
You can believe in the existence of God, yet you are not sure of his existence.
There is no problem in a statement such as “I think that God exists, but I am
not sure”. But you cannot say for instance that “I know he will come but I am
not sure”. Knowledge is more qualitative than opinion and belief. An opinion or
belief cannot be true unless it is grounded or supported with evidence.
Evidence is the unique characteristic of knowledge. That is why customs and
some hereditary matters are always at odds with knowledge. You should
know that it is not because some customs, beliefs or hereditary affairs are
unquestionable that they are synonymous with knowledge. Some
unquestionable beliefs are not well founded or grounded in evidence.
Therefore, they do not constitute knowledge. Always remember that the
knower must not only be able to adduce enough evidence but must also know
that he knows his beliefs. For to know is to know that you know. It must be
clear to you now that knowledge is quite different from opinion or belief. We
have knowledge only when we can provide reasons and evidence for our
claims. On the contrary, belief or opinion is based on inner, personal certainty
and conviction. Knowledge is objective i.e. it must be communicable and
verifiable.
3.2. Sources of Knowledge
One of the perennial questions in the history of epistemology that is theory of
knowledge has always been: How does knowledge come about? How do we
know propositions to be true? Or by what means do we come by our
knowledge of the real world? Answers to these questions have been given
through the following means: (a) Reason, (b) Sense experience (c) Authority
(d) Intuition (e) Revelation/faith and (f) Mystical experience.
3.2.1 Reason
Rationalism is a school of thought in epistemology which holds that human
beings can acquire knowledge of reality using our minds alone, by thinking or
pure reason. To any rationalist, reason is a necessary ingredient for all our
knowledge claims. This is one of the reasons why Aristotle defines man as “a
rational animal”. Thus, the ability to think is what is called reason. Any serious
rationalist agrees that we cannot acquire knowledge through sense
experience without the powers of reason. For them, it is true that our
perceptual experience provides the raw material for judgments, but without
reason, we cannot make judgments at all. For instance, to reason that the
object in front of you is a blackboard you must first of all recognize it as a
blackboard based on certain perceptual characteristics such as colour, smell,
37
taste, size, shape as they recur in your experience. Then, by way of
abstraction, you can recognize a blackboard when there is a combination of
these characteristics. To the rationalist therefore “… reason is the prima-
matrix of human knowledge and with it alone the certainty of human
knowledge is guaranteed” (Ayer, 1956:54). Prominent members of this school
of thought are; Leibniz, Spinoza and Rene Descartes.
3.2.2 Sense Experience
Sense experience is another source of knowledge. The Empiricists are the
proponents of sense experience theory. To any empiricist, as far as
knowledge is concerned, only sense experience matters. In other words,
empiricism is the philosophical theory which denies reason while insisting that
experience is always the necessary ingredient in our knowledge claims of the
natural world. This school of thought or group have Bishop George Berkeley
who asserted Esseestpercipii meaning ‘to be is to be perceived’. His position
simply implies that what i.e. known, true and real is that which satisfies the
sense experience condition. Other prominent members are John Locke and
David Hume.
3.2.3 Authority
Authority is also considered as one of the sources of knowledge. Authority as
source of knowledge occurs when we make certain claims to knowledge
based on the authority of someone who is a specialist in the particular field of
knowledge. “Magister dixit” i.e. the ‘Master said”. For instance, I know HIV is
real because Prof. Isaac Adewole the Minister of Health in Nigeria said so..
Here, Prof. Isaac Adewole becomes an authority on the subject. But you
should always remember that even as a source of knowledge, authority is a
relative term. A man may be an authority in a certain field of knowledge like
the Minister, however, this does not confer certainty on the claim being made
even if he claims some knowledge of it. Aside, it is fallacious to reason this
way.
3.2.4 Intuition
Another source of knowledge is intuition; Balm defines intuition as the
“immediacy of apprehension” (1995:5). According to him:… Intuition is the
name we give to the way
awareness apprehends when awareness apprehends appearance directly. No
intuiting exists apart from awareness, no awareness exists without intuiting
(1995:5). That is why you sometimes hear people say: “I have a sense of
intuition”. “I know by intuition that President Mohamadu Buhari will contest in
2019.”
3.2.5 Revelation and Faith
These are also considered as sources of knowledge. It is common to hear
people saying: “it was revealed to me in a dream” or “it was revealed to me by
38
God and I have faith in it”. “My faith guides me in this matter and I know that it
is certainly true”.
4.0 Conclusion
This study unit dealt with different sources of knowledge and their criteria for
knowing. It also emphasized the common sense and philosophical
understanding of knowledge, belief and opinion.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/eYZCHcMwaHU
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Ayer, A.J. The Problems of Knowledge. London: Penguin Books, 19541
Bahm, A.J. Epistemology. New Mexico: Archie J. Bahm Publisher, 1995.
Hospers, J. An Introduction to Philosophical Analysis. Revised edition.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1956.
Russell, B. The Problem of Philosophy. London: Penguin Books, 1980.42
Discussion Forum
1. In your context, state and explain three main relationships between
philosophy and academic discipline.
2. Philosophy is often regarded as an abstract course. In not more than
250 words, justify this statement.
3. Using your context, state two philosophical thoughts and explain why
they are philosophical.
4. Post your answers on the discussion forum
5. Read the posts of two other persons and write you comment on each
from philosophical view.
39
Module 2 History and Development of Philosophy
Unit 1 The Ancient Age of Philosophy
Unit 2 Medieval and Renaissance Age of Philosophy
Unit 3 Modern Period of Philosophy
Unit 4 Philosophical Movements In The Contemporary Period
Unit 5 The Idea of African Philosophy
Unit 1 The Ancient Age of Philosophy
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Contents
3.1 Pre-Socratic Age
3.1.1 Thales
3.1.2 Anaximander
3.1.3 Anaximenex
3.2 Other Philosophers of the Pre-Socratic Age
3.2.1 Heraclitus
3.2.2 Parmenedes
3.2.3 Zeno of Elea
3.2.4 Empedocles, Democritus and Pythagoras
3.3 Socrates and the Classical Age
3.3.1 Socrates
3.3.2 Plato
3.3.3 Aristotle
3.4 Philosophical movement of the Socratic Age
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
1.0 Introduction
In this unit, you will be introduced to the history and development of
philosophy, from the ancient age to the contemporary age. You will also read
about the major pre-occupation(s) of some philosophers that were prominent
in each of the stages of the development of philosophy. You need to know
that these stages of development in philosophy are sometimes referred to as
an age. So, we shall be talking about ‘The Pre-Socratic Age’, ‘The Mediaeval
Age’, ‘Modern Age’, and so on.
40
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Discuss or write about the philosophical events of the Pre-Socratic age
• Identify some of the philosophers that dominated the Socratic age
• Explain the main philosophical preoccupations or focus of the Ancient
Age
• Explain the differences between the Pre-Socratic and the Socratic Era
• Explain the achievements of philosophy in the Ancient Age
• Demonstrate philosophical skills in analysing ancient age philosophy.
3.0 Main Content
The history of philosophy can be classified into the following:
1. Ancient Age, which include; Pre-Socratic, Socratic or Classical
Philosophy, and some other Ancient Philosophical Schools
2. Medieval Age
3. Modern Age (Age of Enlightenment and Age of Reason)
4. Late Modern Age
5. Contemporary Philosophy
But in this unit, you will be examining the Ancient Age of philosophy
3.1 The Ancient Age
As stated earlier, each of the above classifications represent an age of
development in philosophy. In other words, we can say that growth or
development of philosophy is from Ancient Age to the Contemporary Age.
Growing through these ages, philosophy has gone through various stages of
transformations of moving from the Dark Age, to the age of enlightenment and
the contemporary time.
3.1.1 Pre-Socratic
As you are aware, philosophy grew out of wonder and curiosity. What is
known as Western Philosophy- by which we usually mean everything apart
from the Eastern Philosophy of China, Indian, Japan, etc. really began in
Greece in about 6th B.C. But, you need to know that before this period, the
Greeks have always been asking questions on issues that concerns man and
his existence. Theyask questions about reality, cosmos, and other
fundamental matters that surrounds human existence. Answers to these
questions are always sought through religion and mythology. However, at
some point, answers to some of these questions are considered not rational
enough, especially by Thales, Anaximander and Aneximenes as prominent
figures. These group of thinkers were curious to know the ultimate source of
things. Thus, the question; what is the ultimate source or primary source of all
things? This question got different responses from the three philosophers and
they attempt a more rational response to the above question and offer a
rational explanation of the universe.
41
3.1.2 Thales of Miletus
He is usually considered the first proper philosopher, although he was just as
concerned with natural philosophy (what we now call science) as with
philosophy as we know it. Perhaps, you should note that Thales and most of
the other Pre-Socratic philosophers (i.e. those who lived before Socrates)
limited themselves in their discussions to what we can call Metaphysics. This
is because they were preoccupied with inquiry into the nature of existence,
being and the world. They were referred to as Materialists, because, they
believed that all things are composed of material entity only). Also, they were
mainly preoccupied with attempts to identify or establish what reality is without
recourse to any kind of supernatural or mythological explanations. That is,
they attempt to identify or establish that the world is made up of a single
underlying item or substance. (This idea is referred to as Monisim in the latter
years of the development of philosophy). According to Thales, he thought the
whole universe was composed of different forms of water. In other words,
according to Thales, water is the primary source of all things in the universe. It
is the original element of which all things were made; water is the underlying
unity in all things. Thales is also said to have predicted an eclipse of the sun
which is believed to have occurred in 585BC.
3.1.3 Anaximander
He is the second Greek philosopher and he was a pupil of Thales. He was
also from Miletus in Ionia. Like his master, he held that there must be an
original element, a primary stuff of which all things were made. But he did not
think it was water as Thales did. According to him, the primary source of all
things cannot be any of the things we know because all the elements we
know conflict with each other. If any of them were the original stuff, it would
simply conquer and submerge the others. The source of all things must
therefore be a neutral element, different from all the elements we know. It
must be infinite, boundless, eternal and indeterminate. You also must
know that Anaximander maintained that this world is not the only world that
exist. He believed that there are many worlds and this world of ours is just one
of them. He is said to have made the first map ever in history. He is also
regarded as the early evolutionist, because he maintained that all living things
originated from the sea and during time developed into various forms by
means of adaptations to the environment. He believed that man also evolved
from animals but not the kinds of animals we know. He is known to have
maintained that the earth is like a cylinder in shape, a position that
differentiate him from those who believed that the world is flat.
3.1.4 Anaximenes
He is also from Miletus and he is the third Greek philosopher. Like his
predecessors, he also believes that there must be an original stuff from which
all things are made, the primary source or underlying source of all things. To
him, this is Air and not Water. Air is the original source and the primary
element of all things. “Just as our soul being air, hold us together, so do
breathe and air encompass the whole world”. To explain his position, he
42
develops what he called the theory of condensation and refraction. When
air rarefies, it become light and turns into fire; and when it condenses it
become cold, thick and turn into winds, cloud, water, earth and finally stones,
both hot and cold, light and thick things, indeed all things came from
condensation and refraction. Thus, by these processes, all things came from
air and will dissolve into air. To Anaximenes, the earth is flat and rests on air.
Although, these three philosophers came from the same city called Miletus in
Ionia and their philosophical discussion was referred to as the Ionian School
of philosophy, however, this school of philosophy came to an end with the
destruction of the city of Miletus by the Persian in 494BC.
3.2 Other Philosophers in the Pre-Socratic age
Another issue the Pre-Socratics wrestled with was the so-called problem of
change, how things appear to change from one form to another. Some of the
philosophers who engaged themselves in this issue are, Heraclitus,
Parmenides, Zeno of Elea, Empedocles, Democritus and Pythagoras.
3.2.1 Heraclitus
In seeking for the primary source of all things, like the three Ionians, he
thought that the original stuff from which all things were made is Fire.
However, Heraclitus was more preoccupied with the problem of change in his
philosophical enterprise. He believed in an on-going process of perpetual
change, a constant interplay of opposites. Given his believe that everything
in the universe undergoes perpetual change, he at a time asserted that
“Nothing is static, everything is in a state of flux”.
3.2.2 Parmenedes
On like Heraclitus, Parmenedes, using a complicated deductive argument,
denied that there was any such thing as change at all, and argued that
everything that exists is permanent, indestructible and unchanging. This
might sound like an unlikely proposition, but Parmenedes' challenge was
well-argued and was important in encouraging other philosophers to come up
with convincing counter-arguments.
3.2.3 Zeno of Elea
He was a student of Parmenedes, and is best known for his famous
paradoxes of motion (the best known of which is that of the Achilles and
the Hare). His idea of paradoxes of motion helped to lay the foundations for
the study of Logic. However, Zeno’s underlying intention was really to show,
like his master Parmenedes and all other before him, that all belief in plurality
and change is mistaken, and thatmotion is nothing but an illusion.
Although, these ideas might seem to us rather simplistic and unconvincing
today, we should bear in mind that, during this time, there was really no
scientific knowledge whatsoever. Their attempts were therefore important first
43
steps in the development of philosophical thought. They also set the stage for
two other important Pre-Socratic philosophers: Empedocles and Democritus.
3.2.4 Empedocles, Democritus and Pythagoras
These two, Empedocles and Democritus combined their ideas into the theory
of the four classical elements (earth, air, fire and water), which became the
standard dogma for much of the next two thousand years. Democritus later
developed the extremely influential idea of Atomism. This theory simply
states that all of reality is composed of tiny, indivisible and indestructible
building blocks known as atoms, which form different combinations and
shapes within the surrounding void.
Another early and very influential Greek philosopher was Pythagoras, who led
a rather bizarre religious sect and essentially believed that all of reality was
governed by numbers, and that its essence could be encountered through
the study of mathematics. He is known for his claim that with figures the
world can be constructed.
3.3 Socratic or Classical Age of Philosophy
3.3.1 Socrates
Philosophy really took off, though, with Socrates and Plato in the 5th - 4th
Century B.C. (often referred to as the Classical or Socratic period of
philosophy). Unlike most of the Pre-Socratic philosophers before him,
Socrates was more concerned with how people should behave, and so was
perhaps the first major philosopher of Ethics. He developed a system of
critical reasoning to work out how to live properly and to tell the difference
between right and wrong. His system, sometimes referred to as the Socratic
Method, was to break problems down into a series of questions, the answers
to which would gradually distil a solution. Although he was careful to claim not
to have all the answers himself, his constant questioning made him many
enemies among the authorities of Athens who eventually had him put to
death.
We must point out here that Socrates himself never wrote anything down, and
what we know of his views comes from the "Dialogues" of his student Plato,
perhaps the best known, most widely studied and most influential philosopher
of all time.
3.3.2 Plato
In his writings, Plato was a pupil of Socrates. He blended Ethics, Metaphysics
(the study of reality), Political Philosophy and Epistemology (the theory of
knowledge and how we can acquire it) into an interconnected and systematic
philosophy. He provided the first real opposition to the Materialism of the Pre-
Socratic, and he developed doctrines such as Platonic Realism,
Essentialism and Idealism, including his important and famous theory of
Forms and universals. Plato believed that the world we perceive around us
44
is composed of mere representations or instances of the pure ideal Forms.
The real world to him, had their own existence elsewhere. This idea of Plato
is known as Platonic Realism. He used his theory of World of Form to
develop and explain his epistemology, (he identified the four levels of
knowledge namely imagining, belief, thinking and perfect intelligence). He
also identified the soul as having three parts namely, reason, spirit and
appetite. These three parts of man’s soul are related to the three strata or
classes in the society: the individual appetites represent the class of workers
who satisfy these appetites (the craftsmen or artisans), there is a connection
between the spirited element in man and the large-scale version of this force
in the military (the guardians or the soldiers). Also, there is a deep connection
between the rational element in men and the unique function of leadership in
the ruler (the philosopher king). This tripartite distinction of the soul and the
society was used to explain his idea of Justice both in the soul and in the
state. Thus, to him, there will be justice in the soul if the three parts of the soul
functions independently of one another and there will be justice in the state if
each of the parts that is, the artisan, the soldier and the ruler operate
without any interference. Plato developed a theory known as Eudaimonism
This is the believed that virtue was a kind of knowledge (the knowledge of
good and evil) that we need in order to reach the ultimate good, which is the
aim of all human desires and actions. Plato’s Political Philosophy was
developed mainly in his famous book "Republic", where he describes an
ideal (though rather grim and anti-democratic) society composed of Workers
and Warriors, ruled over by wise Philosopher Kings.
3.3.4 Aristotle
Aristotle was the third in the main trio of classical philosophers. He was
Plato’s student. He created an even more comprehensive system of
philosophy than his master Plato. His philosophical works span across Ethics,
Aesthetics, Metaphysics, Logic Politics and Science, and his work influenced
almost all later philosophical thinking, particularly those of the medieval
period. Aristotle was engaged in a system of logic called Deductive Logic, with
its emphasis on syllogism. Syllogism is a system of logic where a conclusion,
or synthesis, is inferred from two other premises, the thesis and antithesis.
This system of logic remained the dominant form of Logic until the 19th
Century. Unlike Plato, Aristotle held that Form and Matter cannot be
separated, and cannot exist apart from each other. Although, he too believed
in a kind of Eudemonism, Aristotle saw Ethics as a very complex concept and
that human beings cannot always control our own moral environment. He
believed that happiness could best be achieved by living a balanced life and
avoiding excess by pursuing a golden mean in everything. This position is like
his formula for political stability through steering a middle course between
tyranny and democracy.
3.4 Philosophical Movements of the Socratic Age
It should be noted here that in the philosophical history of Ancient Greece,
there were several other schools or movements that also held sway, in
addition to Platonism and Aristotelianism. These movements or schools are:
45
• Sophism: -This group held a relativistic view on knowledge. In other
words, they believe that there is no absolute truth and two points of
view can be acceptable at the same time. Generally, they hold
skeptical views on truth and morality (although, over time, Sophism
came to denote a class of intellectuals who taught courses in rhetoric
and "excellence" or "virtue" for money). Prominent members of this
movement are Protagoras and Gorgias.
• Cynicism: - This group rejected all conventional desires for health,
wealth, power and fame, and advocated a life free from all possessions
and property as the way to achieving Virtue (a life best exemplified by
its most famous proponent, Diagenes).
• Skepticism :- This is also known as Pyrrhonism after the movement's
founder, Pyrrho, which held that, because we can never know the true
in nner substance of things, only how they appear to us (and therefore
we can never know which opinions are right or wrong), we should
suspend judgment on everything as the only way of achieving inner
peace.
• Epicureanism :- This group was named after its founder Epicurus,
whose main goal was to attain happiness and tranquillity through
leading a simple, moderate life, the cultivation of friendships and the
limiting of desires (quite contrary to the common perception of the word
"epicurean").
• Hedonism:-The Hedonists are of the view that pleasure is the most
important pursuit of mankind, and that we should always act so as to
maximize our own pleasure.
• Stoicism :- This theory was developed by Zeno of Citium, and later
espoused by Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius), which taught self-control
and fortitude as a means of overcoming destructive emotions in order
to develop clear judgment and inner calm and the ultimate goal of
freedom from suffering.
• Neo-Platonism :- This developed out of Plato's work, largely by
Plotinus. It was largely a religious philosophy which became a strong
influence on early Christianity (especially on St. Augustine), and taught
the existence of an ineffable and transcendent One, from which the
rest of the universe "emanates" as a sequence of lesser beings.
4.0 Conclusion
From the above, it is obvious that what started ordinarily as mere idea in the
Pre-Socratic era has at the time of Aristotle become a discipline of inquiry that
borders on human being, his existence and the nature of the cosmos with
various ideas developed by individual philosophers and movements.
46
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/G4FGP3u3SQE
Audio
6.0 Books for Further Readings
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich; Brown, Robert F. The History of Philosophy:
Greek philosophy. Clarendon Press. 2006.
Stumpf, S.E Philosophy, History and Problems, 2nd edition London: McGraw-
Hill Book Company 1975
Ganeri, Jonardon; The Lost Age of Reason Philosophy In Early Modern India
1450–1700, Oxford: Oxford University. press.
Edwards, Paul, ed. (1967). The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Macmillan &
Free Press.
Rutherford, Donald .The Cambridge Companion to Early Modern Philosophy.
Cambridge: University Press. 2006
Schmitt, C. B.; Skinner, Quentin, (eds.) The Cambridge History of
Renaissance Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. 1988.
Honderich, T., (ed.) The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford University
Press. 1995.
47
Unit 2 Medieval and Renaissance Age of Philosophy
Contents
I.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Some Islamic philosophers of the Medieval Age
3.1.1 Avicenna
3.1.2 Averroes
3.2 Christian philosophers of the Medieval Age
3.2.1 St. Augustine
3.2.2 St. Anslem
3.3 The Renaissance period
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This unit is a further discussion of the development of the history of
philosophy. In this unit, we shall discuss the age of philosophy that follows
immediately after the Ancient age. This age is called the Medieval or the
Middle age. We shall also discuss another age of philosophy that almost
submerge into the medieval period that is the Renaissance. This is because
sometimes, drawing distinction between the era and the medieval is difficult.
Moreover, it was the era that is seen to have restored the philosophical
enterprise from the dogmatism of the middle age.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Discuss the nature of philosophy in the medieval period
• Identify the various groups of philosophy that existed in the
medieval period
• Explain the philosophical doctrines of the Islamic philosophers
• Explain the role(s) of the Christian philosophers of the age
• Justify the role of the renaissance group in liberating philosophy in
the middle age.
3.0 Main Content
Medieval/Middle Age
This period was around 11th Century, when there was a renewed flowering
of thought, both in Christian Europe and in Muslim and Jewish Middle East.
Most of the philosophers of this time were mainly concerned with proving the
existence of God and with reconciling Christianity/Islam with the classical
philosophy of Greece (particularly Aristotelianism).
48
3.1 Islamic Philosophers
3.1.1 Avicenna(11th century, Persian) :-
He is one of the great Islamic philosophers of the Medieval period. Avicenna
tried to reconcile the rational philosophy of Aristotelianism and Neo-Platonism
with Islamic theology. He also introduced the concept of the "tabula rasa"
(the idea that humans are born with no innate or built-in mental content). His
idea of “tabula rasa” later influenced British Empiricists like John Locke.
3.1.2 Averroes (12th century, Spanish/Arabic) :-
He is another Islamic philosopher whose translations and commentaries on
Aristotle had a profound impact on the Scholastic movement in Europe, and
he claimed that Avicenna’s interpretations were a distortion of genuine
Aristotelianism. It is important to state here also, that the Jewish philosopher
Maimonides also attempted the same reconciliation of Aristotle with the
Hebrew Scriptures around the same time.
3.2 Christian Philosophers
Before we discuss these Christian philosophers, perhaps it should be
mentioned here that the Medieval Christian philosophers were all part of a
movement called Scholasticism which tried to combine Logic, Metaphysics,
Epistemology and Semantics (the theory of meaning) into one discipline, and
to reconcile the philosophy of the ancient classical philosophers (particularly
Aristotle) with Christian theology. Also, you need to understand the Scholastic
method as a method that thoroughly and critically read the works of renowned
scholars, note down any disagreements and points of contention, and then
resolve them using Formal Logic and analysis of language.
3.2 1 St. Augustine
He hailed from Tagaste in North Africa. He was the first philosopher who
introduced the problem of evil in the world of utmost important. To him, since
God created all things and God is infinitely good, how then do we explain the
existence of evil in a world that a good God created? This problem to
Augustine possesses serious problem to the existence of God, who is said to
be good, kind, powerful and the creator of all things. He known for his concept
of time, which he believed to be an elusive concept. Thus, to him although we
talk about Past, Present and Future, neither the past nor the future really
exists, for the past is gone and the future is not yet, and the present is only a
passing moment. He is also known for his idea that the concept of truth and
God in some sense are within man, but since God is internal He also
transcends man. His proof for the existence of God is that since every effect
has a cause, the universe as an effect must have a cause. This cause must
be God. Also, he argued that the universal conviction of mankind that God
exists is proof of God’s existence. If God does not exist hoe did the whole
human race become convinced of his existence.
49
3.2.2 St. Anselm:-
He is best known as the originator of the Ontological Argument for the
existence of God by abstract reasoning alone. St Anselm is often regarded as
the first of the Scholastics. Another member of the Scholastic is St Thomas
Aquinas. He is also known for his five rational proofs for the existence of God,
and his definition of the cardinal virtues and the theological virtues. He is
generally considered the greatest, and certainly had the greatest influence on
the theology of the Catholic Church. Other important members of the
Scholastics included Peter Abelard, Albertus Magnus, John Duns Scotus and
William of Ockham. Each of them contributed slight variations to the same
general beliefs. For instance, Abelard introduced the doctrine of limbo for
unbaptized babies; Scotus rejected the distinction between essence and
existence that Aquinas had insisted on; Ockham introduced the important
methodological principle known as Ockham's Razor, that one should not
multiply arguments beyond the necessary; etc.
It is important to mention here that the revival of classical civilization and
learning in the 15th and 16th Century known as the Renaissance brought the
Medieval period to a close. It was marked by a movement away from religion
and medieval Scholasticism and towards Humanism (the belief that humans
can solve their own problems through reliance on reason and the scientific
method) and a new sense of critical inquiry.
3.3 Renaissance Age
This age is classified as the period of revival of classical civilization and
learning, which occurred in the 15th and 16th Century. It was the age that
brought the medieval period to a close. It was marked by a movement away
from religion and medieval Scholasticism and towards Humanism (the belief
that humans can solve their own problems through reliance on reason and the
scientific method) and a new sense of critical inquiry.
Among the major philosophical figures of the Renaissance were:
Erasmus:- He attacked many of the traditions of the Catholic Church and
popular superstitions, and became the intellectual father of the European
Reformation;
Niccolo Machiavelli:- He was known for his acclaimed cynical and devious
Political Philosophy. His political ideas have become notorious and has
remained controversial among scholars.
Thomas More:- He was a Christian Humanist whose book "Utopia"
influenced generations of politicians and planners and even the early
development of Socialist ideas.
Francis Bacon:- He is an empiricist. His belief is that truth requires evidence
from the real world. His application of inductive reasoning - generalizations
based on individual instances - were both influential in the development of
modern scientific methodology.
50
4.0 Conclusion
From the above discussion, it could be said that in the Middle age, philosophy
was made to be subservient to religion. The philosophers of the age were
predominantly religious fathers who employed philosophy to teach religious
doctrine. However, the renaissance philosopher was those who delivered
philosophy from the aprons of the religious father to which it was tied. They
gave philosophy its freedom and make rationality its basis.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/gCaoeK6p9vY
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich; Brown, Robert F. The History of Philosophy:
Greek philosophy. Clarendon Press. 2006.
Stumpf S.E., Philosophy, History and Problems, 2nd edition London: McGraw-
Hill Book Company 1975
Ganeri, Jonardon; The Lost Age of Reason Philosophy In Early Modern India
1450–1700, Oxford: Oxford University. press.
Edwards, Paul, ed. (1967). The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Macmillan &
Free Press.
Rutherford, Donald .The Cambridge Companion to Early Modern Philosophy.
Cambridge: University Press. 2006
Schmitt, C. B.; Skinner, Quentin, (eds.) The Cambridge History of
Renaissance Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. 1988.
Honderich, T., (ed.) The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford University
Press. 1995
51
Unit 3 Modern Period of Philosophy
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Rationalism
3.1.1 Rene Descartes
3.1.2 Baruch Spinoza
3.1.3 Gottfried Leibniz
3.2 Nicolas Malebranche
3.3 British Empiricism
3.3.1 John Locke
3.3.2 Bishop George Berkeley
3.3.3 David Hume
3.4 Immanuel Kant
3.5 Late Modern Period
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References /Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Roughly speaking, the Age of Reason was in the 17th Century and the Age
of Enlightenment was in the 18th Century. These ages recorded serious
advances in science, the growth of religious tolerance and the rise of
liberalism. These ages marked the real beginnings of modern philosophy. In
large part, the period can be seen as an ongoing battle between two opposing
doctrines, Rationalism- which is the belief that all knowledge arises from
intellectual and deductive reason, rather than from the senses; and
Empiricism, which represent the belief that the origin of all knowledge is
sense experience.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Identify the various philosophical schools that emanated in the modern
age
• Differentiate the philosophical believe and practices of these schools
• Explain the level of growth or advancement that philosophy has made
• Discuss the philosophical tenets of this period
52
3.0 Main Contents
Modern Age (Age of Reason and The Age of Enlightenment)
3.1 Rationalism
3.1.1 Rene Descartes
We must note here that the revolution that took place in philosophical thought
in these two ages was sparked by the French philosopher and mathematician
René Descartes. He was the first figure in the loose movement known as
Rationalism, and much of subsequent Western philosophy can be seen as a
response to his ideas. His method was known as methodological skepticism
and its aim was to dispel Skepticism and arrive at certain knowledge. This
method was to remove everything about which there could be even a
suspicion of doubt (including the unreliable senses, even his own body which
could be merely an illusion) to arrive at the single indubitable principle that he
possessed consciousness and was able to think ("I think, therefore I am"
“Cogito ergo Sum”). He then argued that our perception of the world around
us must be created for us by God. He saw the human body as a kind of
machine that follows the mechanical laws of physics, while the mind or what
he called consciousness was a quite separate entity, not subject to the laws of
physics, which is only able to influence the body and deal with the outside
world by a kind of mysterious two-way interaction. This idea, known as
Dualism (or, more specifically, Cartesian Dualism), set the agenda for later
philosophical discussion of the "mind-body problem". Despite Descartes'
innovation and boldness, he was a product of his times and never abandoned
the traditional idea of a God, which he saw as the one true substance from
which everything else was made.
3.1.2 Baruch Spinoza
Spinoza happens to be the second great figure of Rationalism. He was the
Dutchman. His conception of the world was quite different from that of
Descartes. He built up a strikingly original self-contained metaphysical system
in which he rejected Descartes' Dualism in favour of a kind of Monism where
mind and body were just two different aspects of a single underlying
substance which might be called Nature (and which he also equated with a
God of infinitely many attributes, effectively a kind of Pantheism). Spinoza
was a thoroughgoing Determinist who believed that absolutely everything
(even human behaviour) occurs through the operation of necessity, leaving
absolutely no room for free will and spontaneity. He also took the Moral
Relativist position that nothing can be in itself either good or bad, except to
the extent that it is subjectively perceived to be so by the individual (and,
anyway, in an ordered deterministic world, the very concepts of Good and Evil
can have little or no absolute meaning).
53
3.1.3 Gottfried Leibniz
He is the third great Rationalist and he was a German philosopher. In order
to overcome what he saw as drawbacks and inconsistencies in the theories of
the first two rationalists, Descartes and Spinoza, he devised a rather eccentric
metaphysical theory of monads operating according to a pre-established
divine harmony. According to Leibniz's theory, the real world is actually
composed of eternal, non-material and mutually-independent elements he
called monads, and the material world that we see and touch is actually just
phenomena (appearances or by-products of the underlying real world). The
apparent harmony prevailing among monads arises because of the will of God
(the supreme monad) who arranges everything in the world in a deterministic
manner. Leibniz also saw this as overcoming the problematic interaction
between mind and matter arising in Descartes' system, and he declared that
this must be the best possible world, simply because it was created and
determined by a perfect God.
3.2 Nicolas Malebranche
Nicolas Malebranche, a French philosopher was also an important figure in
17th Century. He was a follower of Descartes in that he believed that humans
attain knowledge through ideas or immaterial representations in the mind.
However, he argued (more or less following St. Augustine point of view) that
all ideas actually exist only in God, and that God was the only active power.
Thus, he believed that what appears to be "interaction" between body and
mind is caused by God, but in such a way that similar movements in the body
will "occasion" similar ideas in the mind, an idea he called Occasionalism.
3.3 British Empiricism
Direct opposition to the continental European Rationalism movement was the
equally loose movement of British Empiricism, which was also represented by
three main philosophers, John Locke, Bishop George Berkeley and David
Hume.
3.3.1 John Locke
He argued that all of our ideas, whether simple or complex, are ultimately
derived from experience, so that the knowledge of which we are capable is
therefore severely limited both in its scope and in its certainty. His idea
represents a kind of modified Skepticism. He believed that the real inner
natures of things derive from what he called their primary qualities which we
can never experience and so never know. Locke, like Avicenna before him,
believed that the mind was a tabula rasa (or blank slate) and that people are
born without innate ideas, although he did believe that humans have absolute
natural rights which are inherent in the nature of Ethics. Along with Thomas
Hobbes and Jean Jack Rousseau, he was one of the originators of Social
Contract Theory, which formed the theoretical underpinning for democracy,
54
republicanism, Liberalism and Libertarianism, and his political views
influenced both the American and French Revolutions.
3.3.2 Bishop George Berkeley
The second of the British Empiricists chronologically was Bishop George
Berkeley, although his empiricism was of a more radical kind, mixed with a
twist of Idealism. Using cogent arguments, he developed the rather counter-
intuitive system known as Immaterialism (or sometimes as Subjective
Idealism), which held that underlying reality consists exclusively of minds and
their ideas, and that individuals can only directly know these ideas or
perceptions (although not the objects themselves) through experience. Thus,
according to Berkeley's theory, an object only really exists if someone is there
to see or sense it ("to be is to be perceived"), although, he added, the infinite
mind of God perceives everything all the time, and so in this respect the
objects continue to exist.
3.3.3 David Hume
David Hume was the third, and perhaps greatest, of the movement. He
believed strongly that only experience and observation should be the
foundations of any logical argument. Hume argued that, although we may
form beliefs and make inductive inferences about things outside our
experience (by means of instinct, imagination and custom), they cannot be
conclusively established by reason and we should not make any claims to
certain knowledge about them. Although, he never openly declared himself an
atheist, he found the idea of a God effectively nonsensical, given that there is
no way of arriving at the idea through sensory data. He attacked many of the
basic assumptions of religion and gave many of the classic criticisms of some
of the arguments for the existence of God (particularly the teleological
argument). In his Political Philosophy, Hume stressed the importance of
moderation, and his work contains elements of both Conservatism and
Liberalism.
3.4 Some other philosophers of the period
Aside the above discussed philosophers, there were some other "non-
aligned" philosophers of the period and many of were most active in the area
of Political Philosophy. Some of them and ideas of their philosophical
discussion are mentioned below.
• Thomas Hobbes, who described in his famous book "Leviathan" how
the natural state of mankind was brute-like and poor, and how the
modern state was a kind of "social contract" (Contractarianism)
whereby individuals deliberately give up their natural rights for the sake
of protection by the state (accepting, according to Hobbes, any abuse
of power as the price of peace, which some have seen as a justification
for authoritarianism and even Totalitarianism);
55
• Blaise Pascal, a confirmed Fideist (the view that religious belief
depends wholly on faith or revelation, rather than reason, intellect or
natural theology) who opposed both Rationalism and Empiricism as
being insufficient for determining major truths;
• Voltaire, an indefatigable fighter for social reform throughout his life,
but wholly cynical of most philosophies of the day, from Leibniz’s
optimism to Pascal's pessimism, and from Catholic dogma to French
political institutions;
• Jean-Jacques Rousseau, whose discussion of inequality and whose
theory of the popular will and society as a social contract entered into
for the mutual benefit of all strongly influenced the French Revolution
and the subsequent development of Liberal, Conservative and even
Socialist theory;
• Edmund Burke, who was considered as one of the founding fathers of
modern Conservatism and Liberalism, although he also produced
perhaps the first serious defence of Anarchism.
3.5 Immanuel Kant
He was a German philosopher who appeared towards the end of the Age of
Enlightenment. Kant made another paradigm shift as important as that which
was made by Descartes some years earlier, and in many ways, this marks
the shift to Modern philosophy. He sought to move philosophy beyond the
debate between Rationalism and Empiricism and he attempted to combine
those two apparently contradictory doctrines into one overarching system. A
whole movement called Kantianism developed in the wake of his work, and
most of the subsequent history of philosophy can be seen as responses, in
one way or another, to his ideas.
According to Kant, Empiricism and Rationalism could be combined. He also
believed that statements were possible that were both synthetic (a posteriori
knowledge from experience alone as we have in Empiricism) but also a
priori (from reason alone, as we have in Rationalism). Thus, without the
senses we could not become aware of any object, but without understanding
and reason we could not form any conception or idea of it. However, our
senses can only tell us about the appearance of a thing, phenomenon and
not the "thing-in-itself," noumenon, which Kant believed was essentially
unknowable, although we have certain innate predispositions as to what
exists, which is known as Transcendental Idealism). Kant made a great
contribution to Ethics with his theory of the Categorical Imperative. The
theory simply state that we should “act only in such a way that we would want
our actions to become a universal law, applicable to everyone in a similar
situation”. This theory is also interpreted as Moral Universalism and that we
should treat other individuals as ends in themselves, not as mere means,
which means Moral Absolutism, even if that means sacrificing the greater
good. To Kant, any attempts to prove God's existence are just a waste of
time, because our concepts only work properly in the empirical world (which
56
God is above and beyond), although he also argued that it was not irrational
to believe in something that clearly cannot be proven either way.
3.5 Late Modern Period
Let it be stated here also, that the Modern period produced German Idealist
philosophers and Romanticism Movements. Thus, philosophers like Arthur
Schopenhauerwhose philosophy was considered very singular and a product
of the age. He was a thorough-going pessimist who believed that the "will-to-
life" (the drive to survive and to reproduce) was the underlying driving force of
the world, and that the pursuit of happiness, love and intellectual satisfaction
was very much secondary and essentially futile. He saw art (and other
artistic, moral and ascetic forms of awareness) as the only way to overcome
the fundamentally frustration-filled and painful human condition.
The greatest and most influential of the German Idealists was Georg Hegel.
Although, his works have a reputation for abstractness and difficulty, however,
he is often considered the summit of early 19th Century German thought, and
his influence was profound. He extended Aristotle's process of dialectic
(resolving a thesis and its opposing antithesis into a synthesis) to apply to the
real world - including the whole of history - in an on-going process of conflict
resolution towards what he called the Absolute Idea. However, he stressed
that what is really changing in this process is the underlying "Geist" (mind,
spirit, soul), and he saw each person's individual consciousness as being part
of an Absolute Mind, which is sometimes referred to as Absolute Idealism.
Another important figure of this period was Karl Marx who was strongly
influenced by Hegel's dialectical method and his analysis of history. His
Marxist theory including the concepts of historical materialism, class struggle,
the labour theory of value, the bourgeoisie, etc., which he developed with his
friend Friedrich Engels as a reaction against the rampant Capitalism of 19th
Century Europe, provided the intellectual base for later radical and
revolutionary Socialism and Communism.
4.0 Conclusion
The general discussion of philosophy in this age was the focus on human
survival as well as the composition of man. It also examined the nature of the
human society as well as the history of human kind.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/3K4TXKVEIIY
Audio
57
6.0 References/Further Readings
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich; Brown, Robert F. The History of Philosophy:
Greek philosophy. Clarendon Press. 2006.
Stumpf S.E, Philosophy, History and Problems, 2nd edition London: McGraw-
Hill Book Company 1975
Ganeri, Jonardon; The Lost Age of Reason Philosophy In Early Modern India
1450–1700, Oxford: Oxford University. press.
Edwards, Paul, ed. (1967). The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Macmillan &
Free Press.
Rutherford, Donald .The Cambridge Companion to Early Modern Philosophy.
Cambridge: University Press. 2006
Schmitt, C. B.; Skinner, Quentin, (eds.) The Cambridge History of
Renaissance Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. 1988.
Honderich, T., (ed.) The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford University
Press. 1995.
58
Unit 4 Philosophical Movements in The Contemporary
Period
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Utilitarianism
3.2 Pragmatism
3.3 Logical Positivism
3.4 Analytic Philosophy
3.5 Continental Philosophy
3.5.1 Phenomenology
3.5.2 Existentialism
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 Introduction
In this unit, you are going to learn about the various philosophical ideas in the
contemporary time. We shall be talking about Pragmatism, Logical Positivism
and the two philosophical movement trending in the contemporary age, which
are Analytic and Continental philosophy.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Identify the various philosophical traditions that are thriving in the
contemporary time
• Explain the philosophical traditions and the possible problems that may
be associated with them
• Evaluate the relevance of philosophical theories to human
development
• Analyse the impacts of philosophical theories on societal development
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Utilitarianism
In England, the Contemporary age began in the 19th Century. It recorded a
very different kind of philosophy, which grew out of the British Empiricist
tradition of the previous century. One of such philosophy is the Utilitarianism
movement. It was founded by the social reformer, Jeremy Bentham and
waspopularized by his even more radical protegéJohn Stuart Mill. The idea
of Utilitarianismis a type ofConsequentialism. It is kind of approach to
Ethics that stresses an action's outcome or the consequence of an action. It
59
holds that the right action is that which would cause "the greatest happiness
of the greatest number". This theory was refined by Mill to stress the quality
not just the quantity of happiness, and intellectual and moral pleasures over
more physical forms. He counselled that coercion in society is only justifiable
either to defend ourselves or to defend others from harm (the "harm
principle").
3.2 Pragmatism
As we have development and changes in philosophical tradition in England,
so also was the development of philosophical tradition in America in the 19th
Century. The most popular American movement of the late 19th Century was
Pragmatism, which was initiated by C.S Peirce and developed and
popularized by William James and John Dewey. The theory of Pragmatism
is based on Peirce's “pragmatic maxim”, that the meaning of any concept is
really just the same as its operational or practical consequences. In other
words, it means that something is true only insofar as it works in practice.
Peirce also introduced the idea of Fallibilism, the idea that all truths and
"facts" are necessarily provisional, that they can never be certain but only
probable.
Furthermore, William James extended the idea of Pragmatism to serve as a
method for analysing philosophic problems and as a theory of truth. On the
other hand, John Dewey's presented his own Pragmatism as
Instrumentalism. His idea of Instrumentalism simply stands for the
methodological view that concepts and theories are merely useful
instruments, best measured by how effective they are in explaining and
predicting phenomena, and not by whether they are true or false. He also
contributed significantly to the development of Philosophy of Education and to
modern progressive education, particularly what he called "learning-by-doing".
3.3 Logical Positivism
European philosophy was not limited to the German Idealists in the
Contemporary period. There was the French sociologist and philosopher
Auguste Comte who founded the influential Positivism movement around the
belief that the only authentic knowledge was scientific knowledge, based on
actual sense experience and strict application of the scientific method. Comte
saw this as the final phase in the evolution of humanity, and even constructed
a non-theistic, pseudo-mystical "positive religion" around the idea.
The Logical Positivism which developed from Auguste Comte’s Positivism
campaigned for a systematic reduction of all human knowledge down to
logical and scientific foundations and claimed that a statement can be
meaningful only if it is either purely formal especially, mathematics and logic
or if it is capable of empirical verification. The school grew from the
discussions of the so-called "Vienna Circle" in the early 20th Century. The
members of this group include the following philosophers among others:
Mauritz Schlick, Otto Neurath, Hans Hahn, Rudolf Carnap and Ludwig
Wittgenstein whose work Tractatus, published in 1921, was a text of great
60
importance for the group. Tractatus was the picture theory of meaning, which
asserted that ‘thoughts’, as expressed in language, picture the facts of the
world, and that the structure of language is also determined by the structure of
reality. In the 1930s, A.J Ayer was largely responsible for the spread of this
philosophical movement to Britain, even as its influence was already waning
in Europe.
The philosophy of Soren Kierkegaard was also highly influential in the
contemporary period. Having trained in Hegel’s philosophy and not impressed
by it, his philosophy could be a direct reaction against Hegel. He was an
extremely religious man (despite his attacks on the Danish state church). But,
his analysis of the way in which human freedom tends to lead to "angst"
(dread), the call of the infinite, and eventually to despair, was highly influential
on later Existentialists like Heidegger and Jean Paul Sartre.
3.4 Analytic Philosophy and Continental Philosophy
20th Century philosophy was dominated to a great extent by the rivalry
between these two philosophical traditions; Analytic Philosophy, which
simply express the mindset that philosophy should apply ‘logical techniques’
and be consistent with modern science; and Continental Philosophy which,
in very general terms, rejects Scientism and tend towards Historicism.
3.4.1 Analytic Philosophy
An important idea that influenced the Analytic Philosophy tradition was the
Logicism, which was developed during the late 19th Century by Gottlob
Frege. Logicism attempt to show that some, or even all, of mathematics can
be reduced to Logic. Frege’s work revolutionized modern mathematical Logic.
This idea was championed by Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead in
the early 20th Century. They both wrote a book titled Principia Mathematica,
a ground-breaking and monumental book that was particularly important
milestone.
Both Russell and Whitehead went on to develop other philosophies. Russell's
work was mainly in Philosophy of Language and the theory of Logical
Atomism. Whitehead developed a metaphysical approach known as Process
Philosophy, which posited ever-changing subjective forms to complement
Plato's eternal forms.
Some other important philosophers in the Analytic Philosophy includes
W.V.O. Quine, Gibert Ryle and in the early 20th century we have G.E Moore,
a contemporary of Russell at Cambridge University. Moore’s 1903 "Principia
Ethica" has become one of the standard texts of modern Ethics and Meta-
Ethics. The work inspired the movement away from Ethical Naturalism (the
belief that there exist moral properties, which we can know empirically, and
that can be reduced to entirely non-ethicalor natural properties, such as
needs, wants or pleasures) and towards Ethical Non-Naturalism (the belief
that there are no such moral properties). He pointed out that the term "good",
61
for instance, is in fact indefinable because it lacks natural properties in the
way that the terms "blue", "smooth", etc, have them.
3.4. 2 Continental Philosophy
3.4.2.1 Phenomenology
On the Continental Philosophy side, an important figure in the early 20th
Century was the German Edmund Husserl. He was the founder of
Phenomenology a great and very influential movement of the Century.
Husserl developed the idea, parts of which date back to Descartes and even
Plato, that what we call reality really consists of objects and events
(phenomena) as they are perceived or understood in the human
consciousness, and not of anything independent of human consciousness
(which may or may not exist). Thus, we can effectively, ignore sensory data,
and deal only with the "intentional content" that is, the mind's built-in mental
description of external reality, which allows us to perceive aspects of the real
world outside.
3.4.2.2 Existentialism
Martin Heidegger, a formal pupil of Husserl attempted a decline of his
master’s philosophy- Phenomenology in his own philosophy. In his work titled
Being and Time of 1927, Heidegger explained how Husserl's view (of man as
a subject confronted by, and reacting to, objects) broke down in certain
circumstances, and how the existence of objects only has any real
significance and meaning within a whole social context (what Heidegger
called "being in the world"). Heidegger argued that ‘existence’ was
inextricably linked with time, and that being is just an on-going process of
becoming. This line of thinking led him to speculate that we can only avoid
what he called inauthentic lives (and the anxiety which inevitably goes with
such lives) by accepting how things are in the real world andresponding to
situations in an individualistic way. In his later work, Heidegger went so far as
to assert that we have essentially come to the end of philosophy, having tried
out and discarded all the possible permutations of philosophical thought.
Jean-Paul Sartre, along with his French contemporaries, Albert Camus,
Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Simone de Beauvoir was considered the main
figurehead of the Existentialist movement. Sartre, a confirmed Atheist and a
committed Marxist and Communist for most of his life, adapted and extended
the work of Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Husserl and Heidegger, and concluded
that "existence is prior to essence". This is because of his believe that
humans are thrust into an unfeeling, godless universe against our will, and
that we must then establish meaning for our lives by what we do and how we
act. To Sartre, we always have choices (and therefore freedom) and that,
while this freedom is empowering, it also brings with it moral responsibility and
an existential dread (or "angst"). According to Sartre, genuine human dignity
can only be achieved by our active acceptance of this angst and despair.
62
In addition to Existentialism, three main philosophical schools dominated
Continental Philosophy in the second half of the 20th Century. One of the
three schools is Structuralism, which is the broad belief that all human activity
and its products (even perception and thought itself) are constructed and not
natural, and that everything has meaning only through the language system in
which we operate. The second school is the Post-Structuralism, which is a
reaction to the first school- Structuralism. This second school Post-
Structuralism stresses the culture and society of the reader over that of the
author. The third school is called Post-Modernism. It is an even less well-
defined field, marked by a kind of "pick'n'mix" openness to a variety of
different meanings and authorities from unexpected places, as well as a
willingness to borrow unashamedly from previous movements or traditions.
Michel Foucault the French radical philosopher has been associated with all
of these movements. Much of his work are on language and, among other
things, he has looked at how certain underlying conditions of truth have
constituted what was acceptable at different times in history, and how the
body and sexuality are cultural constructs rather than natural phenomena.
Although sometimes criticized for his lax standards of scholarship, his ideas
are nevertheless frequently cited in a wide variety of different disciplines.
Last but not the list that should also be mentioned is Deconstructionism (often
called just Deconstruction). This is a method that focuses on literary criticism
that questions traditional assumptions about certainty, identity and truth, and
looks for the underlying assumptions (both unspoken and implicit), as well as
the ideas and frameworks, that form the basis for thought and belief. The
method was developed by the Frenchman Jacques Derrida (who is also
credited as a major figure in Post-Structuralism). His work is highly cerebral
and self-consciously "difficult", and he has been repeatedly accused of
pseudo-philosophy and sophistry.
4.0 Conclusion
The unit examined some of the most influential philosophical groups or
movement that dominates the philosophical discourse in the 19th and 20th
century. It was pointed out that most of these movements were from but not
so restricted to America and England, where philosophical traditions like
Analytic and continental philosophy, Pragmatism, Logical positivism and many
more are thriving. But we should be quick to say that in the contemporary
time, African Philosophy has also come of age. But, our discussion of African
philosophy shall be reserved for the next unit.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
63
Video https://youtu.be/mlXTa5PY36I
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Kenny, A. Anew History of Western Philosophy, Volume 1, Ancient
Philosophy, Oxford University Press 2009.
Coplestone, F. A History of Philosophy, American Newman Press: Mary Land
1962
Fadahunsi, A. and Adegboyega, O.O. (Eds). Introduction to Philosophy and
Critical Thinking Olabisi Onabanjo University, Ago-Iwoye: Directorate of
General Studies, 2010.
Omoregbe, J. A Simplified History of Western Philosophy Vol 1, Lagos: Joja
Press Ltd. 1999.
A Simplified History of Western Philosophy: Contemporary Philosophy, Vol.3.
Lagos: Joja Press Ltd. 2007.
Grayling, A. C, Philosophy 1: A Guide through the Subject (Oxford University
Press, 1998).
Garfield (Editor), Edelglass (Editor), The Oxford Handbook of World
Philosophy, Introduction.
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich; Brown, Robert F. The History of Philosophy:
Greek philosophy. Clarendon Press. 2006.
Stumpf, S.E., Philosophy, History and Problems, 2nd edition London: McGraw-
Hill Book Company 1975
Ganeri, Jonardon; The Lost Age of Reason Philosophy In Early Modern India
1450–1700, Oxford: Oxford University, Press.
Edwards, Paul, ed. (1967). The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Macmillan &
Free Press.
Rutherford, Donald The Cambridge Companion to Early Modern Philosophy.
Cambridge: University Press. 2006.
Schmitt, C. B.; Skinner, Quentin, (eds.) The Cambridge History of
Renaissance Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. 1988.
Honderich, T., (ed.) The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford University
Press. 1995.
64
Unit 5 The Idea of African Philosophy
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Contents
3.1 The Meaning of African Philosophy
3.2 The Nature of African Philosophy
3.3 Currents in African Philosophy
3.3.1 Ethno-Philosophy
3.3.2 Sage Philosophy
3.3.3 Professional Philosophy
3.3.4 Nationalist and Ideological Philosophy
3.3.5 Hermeneutic Philosophy
3.3.6 Literary and Artistic Philosophy
3.3.7 The Historical Trends
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
The search for African philosophy is dominated by the need for a new identity
authentic to Africans and distinct from those imposed by western culture and
tradition. Before now the beliefs of the Western philosophers was that two
species of human beings exist. On one hand were the Westerners, who are
seen and are believed to be the only set of human beings who could reason.
And on the other side were the Africans, who lacks ideas and whom rational
thought was considered impossible. For instance, some Western scholars like
Hegel believed that Africans are people against which all reason could be
contrasted, some believe even if Africans can reason, it is not as developed
as what exists in the Western society. Since Africans are a special specie of
human race, Africans cannot philosophize, understand or demonstrate any
form of philosophical enterprise. This Unit is therefore an examination of these
Western opinion on African philosophy with a view to show the meaning of
African philosophy.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Analyse the philosophical existence in every culture
• Evaluate the idea of African philosophy in human believe.
65
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Meaning and nature of African philosophy
First begin by asking yourself some questions such as; were our forbearers’
non-thinking creatures? Are we still thinking? Do we have a school of thought
that equips our policy makers, guides our scholars and provide guidance for
our development? Or are we just living on borrowed thought and precepts? All
these questions arouse as a result of the perception of the Westerners about
us and their declaration of our lack of philosophical truth like them.
You need to know that the Western civilization is based on the philosophy of
the West- this philosophy supposedly emanates from Greece specifically
Athens: men like Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Pericles, Cicero, Archimedes and
modern ones like Eistein, Heideggar, Hobbes etc. have contributed not only to
the philosophical thought of the west, but laid the foundation of her science,
technology and art. These thinkers provided valuable answers to issues wide
ranging from morality, government, politics, religion and war. In universities
across Nigeria, students are taught Western Philosophy, but what is
fundamentally lacking is an understanding of their own philosophy. But do we
Africans have philosophy? If we do, what is our philosophy, how do we
describe or define African philosophy.
African philosophy can be formally defined as a critical thinking by Africans on
their experiences of reality. Nigerian born Philosopher K.C. Anyanwu defined
African philosophy as "that which concerns itself with the way in which African
people of the past and present make sense of their destiny and of the world in
which they live.” If we accept this definition, then African philosophy is a
critical reflection on African leaderships in the administration of their duties
towards their citizens; the ethical life style. It will also provide possible
solutions to the problems experienced in African governance, as we have
observed about Western philosophy.
According to Joseph I. Omoregbe a philosopher is one who attempts to
understand the world's phenomena, the purpose of human existence, the
nature of the world, and the place of human beings in that world. Omoregbe
believes that this form of natural philosophy is identifiable in Africa even
before individual African philosophers can be distinguished in the sources.
3.2 Nature of African philosophy
African refers to sub-Sahara African and by simple definition Philosophy is
thinking – to think, man requires a language. Thus, the postulation of early
Western sojourners that once leaved in various parts of the African continent
to have restricted to writing as the only means by which thinking is
guaranteed. Writing is not a prerequisite for thinking. Aside this position and
as noted in the history of philosophy, certain societies in the ancient time also
66
existed and the process of thinking was noted especially during the Pre-
Socratic period of the development of philosophy.
As in most Western cultures, thinkers in Sub-Sahara Africa constituted a
special class of people that sought to preserve their works in various forms
and did so mostly through oral tradition. Morality, religion and politics were a
major concern. But perhaps, due to the nature or peculiarity of their
environments while the European philosopher was primarily occupied with
issues of politics and morality his counterpart in Africa was more interested
and concentrated in religion and morality. Thus, common to the tradition is the
issue morality, which seems to be the core of philosophy. Morality which can
simply be described as the question of what constitutes good or bad is an
essential ingredient of any useable school of thought.
Furthermore, philosophy functions on three main attributes in a society. These
attributes are: Culture, Civilization and Language. Since Africa have a
language, civilization and culture the question we should then ask is, whether
there were reasons behind our culture or not? If the answer is yes, the other
questions that needs to be considered are: What did the definite departure
point for the thinking African? Is there a uniform body of thought called African
Philosophy? It is the last question that always generate arguments whenever
attempt is made to justify the existence of African Philosophy. But then, all the
arguments end up in revealing the multiplicity of religion, languages, cultures,
civilizations various African society and as such what eventually become
African philosophy in the contemporary time. There is multiplicity of ideas that
results from the differences in customs, civilization and tradition but this
cannot suggest that there is no African philosophy.
At the heart of most African Philosophy is the concept of communalism which
is not socialism, communism, capitalism nor the other “isms” of the West.
Most of African philosophies even though not written are encoded in wise
sayings, proverbs which in the words of our fathers are the yam with which
words are eaten. Take for instance the wise words of the people to the east of
the Nigeria: that “if a child washes his hands, he shall eat with kings”. This
word epitomizes the fundamental philosophy of the Igbo people to the east of
the Niger. Indeed, it shows the republican and egalitarian nature of that
society that believes in absolute meritocracy: if the same saying were
postulated in the Yoruba land it will be utter rubbish. In the traditional Yoruba
land, royalty then age and then merit (wealth and accomplishment) is the
order of precedence. There are thousands and thousands of such proverbs
that epitomizes the beauty of the traditionalist approach to African thoughts.
It should be noted here that the disagreement on whether there is African
philosophy, or the possibility of its existence also persist among African
scholars as well, until now that we have professional African Philosophers,
who now research and teach African philosophy in African Universities. One
of the most basic disagreements among scholars concerns what exactly the
term 'African' qualifies: the content of the philosophy and the distinctive
methods employed, or the identities of the philosophers. On the former view,
philosophy counts as African if it involves African themes such as perceptions
67
of time, personhood, space and other subjects, or uses methods that are
defined as distinctively African.2 In the latter view, African philosophy is any
philosophy produced by Africans or by people of African descent, and others
engaged in critiques or analysis of their works.
3.3 Currents in African Philosophy
3.3.1 Ethno- Philosophy
Ethno-philosophy has been used to record the beliefs found in African
cultures. Such an approach treats African philosophy as consisting in a set of
shared beliefs, values, categories, and assumptions that are implicit in the
language, practices, and beliefs of African cultures; in short, the uniquely
African word view. As such, it is seen as an item of communal property rather
than an activity for the individual.
One proponent of this form, Placide Tempels, argued in The Bantu
Philosophy that the metaphysical categories of the Bantu people are reflected
in their linguistic categories. According to this view, African philosophy can be
best understood as springing from the fundamental assumptions about reality
reflected in the languages of Africa.
Another example of this sort of approach is the work of E. J. Algoa a Nigerian
who argues for the existence of an African Philosophy of History stemming
from traditional proverbs from the Niger Delta in his paper "An African
Philosophy of History in the Oral Tradition." Algoa (Babalola: 1998) argues
that in African philosophy, age is seen as an important factor in gaining
wisdom and interpreting the past. In support of this view, he cites proverbs
such as "More days, more wisdom", and "What an old man sees seated, a
youth does not see standing." Truth is seen as eternal and unchanging ("Truth
never rots"), but people are subject to error ("Even a four-legged horse
stumbles and falls"). It is dangerous to judge by appearances ("A large eye
does not mean keen vision"), but first-hand observation can be trusted ("He
who sees does not err"). The past is not seen as fundamentally different from
the present, but all history is contemporary history ("A storyteller does not tell
of a different season"). The future remains beyond knowledge ("Even a bird
with a long neck cannot see the future"). Nevertheless, it is said, "God will
outlive eternity." History is seen as vitally important ("One ignorant of his
origin is nonhuman"), and historians (known as "sons of the soil") are highly
revered ("The son of the soil has the python's keen eyes").
In the same, there are several Yoruba proverbs that points to Metaphysics,
Epistemology, Ethics, and so on. For instance, (prostration is not good
conduct; one’s intention exists in the mind already), which points to
appearance and reality. (It is not understanding the Ifamessage that makes
one to look up, since theIfa is not on the ceiling), this proverb emphasis the
distinction between opinion and knowledge. There is the ethical proverb that
emphasis sincerity and the need to keep promise made - (He who borrows
one thousand, two hundred and refuses to pay has blocked one thousand,
four hundred). However, these arguments must be taken with a grain of
68
cultural relativism, as there are so many cultures in Africa, with patriarchies,
matriarchies, monotheists and traditional religionists among the population,
and as such the attitudes of the two-society mentioned above cannot be taken
to represent the whole of Africa.
Leopold Sedar Senghor also embraced this approach. His view in support of
his approach is embodied in his concept Negritude. In the Negritude, he
argued that the distinctly African approach to reality is based on emotion
rather than logic, works itself out in participation rather than analysis, and
manifests itself through the arts rather than the sciences. Other African
philosophers who upholds the ethno-philosophy approach are John Mbiti,
Cheikh Anta Diop and Mubabinge Bilolo, etc.
It is important to know that this approach has been criticised. The critics of this
approach argue that the actual philosophical work in producing a coherent
philosophical position is being done by the academic philosopher, and that the
sayings of the same culture can be selected from and organised in many
ways to produce very different, often contradictory systems of thought
(Odimegwu etal’: 2009).
3.3.2 Sage Philosophy / Philosophical Sagacity
Philosophical sagacity also known as Sage philosophy is a sort of individualist
version of ethno-philosophy, in which one records the beliefs of certain special
members of a community. It has also been viewed as midway between the
claims of ethno-philosophers and the professional school. According to Odera
Oruka, Sage philosophy is the expressed thoughts of wise men and women in
any given community and is a way of thinking and explaining the world that
fluctuates between popular wisdom (known communal maxims aphorisms and
general common-sense truths) and dialectic wisdom, an expounded wisdom
and a rational thought of some given individuals within a community. The
position of this approach is that, although most societies demand some
degree of conformity of belief and behaviour from their members, a certain
few of those members reach a particularly high level of knowledge and
understanding of their cultures' worldviews; such people are sages. In some
cases, the sage goes beyond mere knowledge and understanding to
reflection and questioning—these become the targets of philosophical
sagacity (Odimegwu: 2009).
This approach wants whatever that will go by the name African philosophy
must meet certain criteria which other philosophies like Western, Chines,
Indian, etc. already have. One of such criteria is not to consider it as a
communal enterprise but rather it should be seen as the work of an individual.
This may explain why Odera Oruka the contended that philosophy is never a
community patrimony which, as such, belonged to all members of the society.
Philosophy as far as this approach is concerned is an individual enterprise. It
is the conscious effort of an individual philosopher as he contemplates the
universe and its reality. Thus, we can speak of individual philosophy as we
speak of the philosophy of Plato, Aristotle, Hegels, etc.
69
One of the criticisms of this approach is that not all reflection and questioning
is philosophical; besides, if African philosophy were to be defined purely in
terms of philosophic sagacity, then the thoughts of the sages could not be
African philosophy, for they did not record them from other sages. Critics
argued further that the problem with both ethno-philosophy and philosophical
sagacity is that there is surely an important distinction between philosophy
and the history of ideas, although other philosophers consider the two topics
to be remarkably similar(Okolo: 1990). The argument is that no matter how
interesting the beliefs of a people such as the Akan or the Yoruba may be to
the philosopher, they remain beliefs, not philosophy. To call them philosophy
is to use a secondary sense of that term, such as in "my philosophy is live and
let live.
3.3.3 Professional philosophy
Professional philosophy is usually identified as that produced by African
philosophers trained in the Western philosophical tradition, that embraces a
universal view of the methods and concerns of philosophy. Those
philosophers identified in this category often explicitly reject the assumptions
of ethno-philosophy and adopt a Universalist worldview of philosophy that
requires all philosophy to be accessible and applicable to all peoples and
cultures in the world. Professional philosophy insist that ethno-philosophy
does not possess the ability to be critical which, is the most important
characteristic of philosophy. To them artefacts of ethno-philosophy, myths,
proverbs, folklores and indeed all the artefacts of ethno-philosophy are not
criticized. That even if they entail wisdom such wisdom is not philosophic in
nature.
It is emphasized by a member of the group that it is the philosophical texts,
that is, writings of these professionally trained philosophers that can only
qualify as African philosophy. ‘African philosophy equals African literature.
That is, the whole of philosophical texts produced by Africans’.
3.3.4 Nationalist and ideological philosophy
Nationalist and ideological philosophy might be considered a special case of
philosophic sagacity, in which not sages but ideologues are the subjects.
Alternatively, it has been considered as a subcategory of professional political
philosophy. In either case, the same sort of problem arises with retaining a
distinction between ideology and philosophy, and also between sets of ideas
and a special way of reasoning. Examples include Nyerere’s U’ jamaa,
Senghor’s Negritude. Nkrumaism, etc.
3.3.5 The Hermeneutic Philosophy
This is a philosophical current which insists that philosophy in Africa should be
hermeneutic in nature. Hermeneutics is a theory and method of interpretation,
especially, the interpretation of philosophical texts. This current was
suggested by a Nigerian philosopher Theophilus Okere (1983) after which
70
other philosophers like Tsenay Serequeberhan took the challenge (Makumba;
2007).
This philosopher does not want to be engaged in the debate like what ensued
between the ethno-philosophers and the professional philosophers. To this
current, myths, folklores, proverbs etc. are no philosophy. Philosophy is and
will remain a conscious effort of a critical individual. However, the non-
philosophy could form the philosophy of any race. It is from non-philosophy
that philosophy arise (Oguejiofor: 2001). The emergence of philosophy from
non-philosophy is made possible through the process of hermeneutics, which
is interpretation. Thus, philosophy arises from non-philosophy when
philosophers reflect on symbols of culture like myth, folklore and proverbs of
the people and interpret them critically. It is therefore correct to say that the
culture of Africa is of some relevance in the emergence of African philosophy.
3.3.6 Literary/ Artistic Philosophy
Literary and Artistic philosophers recognized that there are some African
literary scholars whose writings reflects philosophical issues in their essays.
These scholars are seen to be critical of the African condition in their works
and they try to point out what existence entails in an ideal African situation.
Scholars like Achebe, Soyinka, Okotp’iBtek and others are therefore
recognized as been philosophical.
3.4 The Historical Trend
This idea was initiated by Oguejiofor (2000) he contends that the idea of
philosophy has been in existence in Africa even before the development of
the Greek philosophy. The argument then is that it is the African philosophy,
through the Egyptian connection, that influenced the emergence of philosophy
in Greece. The implication of this argument therefore, is that there would not
have been what is called Geek philosophy today if African philosophy did not
exist. Greek philosophy to them is nothing but child of Egyptian philosophy
which is African.
Moreover, we can identify the influence of the Egyptian philosophy on Greek
philosophy in two ways. First is from the point of the military invasion of Egypt
by the Greeks during which the Egyptians were conquered. At this time all the
works of the Egyptian philosophers were appropriated to themselves. The
second has to do with the view that the people who we today referred to as
Greek philosophers only repeated what they learnt at the feet of the great
Egyptian philosophers who taught them. More so that Greek philosophers like
Pythagoras, Aristotle and some others were trained in Egypt.
4.0 Conclusion
The contention of whether there is African philosophy or not has been laid to
rest given the various African philosophers’ views that have expound in this
unit. Although, some positions may be contestable, however given the level of
71
the growth of African philosophy and its waves in the contemporary time the
philosophy is assuming the same status with the western philosophy.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/deQ-k-zd7zg
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Houtundji, P. African Philosophy: Myth and Reality, Bloomington &
Indianapolis, Indiana University Press, 1996
Odimegwu, I, Ndianefo, I &Agbanusi A. (Eds.), Primer on Philosophy and
Logic,Awka: School of General Studies, Nnamdi Azikiwe University, 2009
Okere, Theophilus. African Philosophy: A Historico-Hermeneutical
Investigation of the Conditions of its Possibility. Lanham, MD: University Press
of America, 1983.
Okolo, C.B. Problems of African Philosophy and One Other Essay, Enugu:
Cecta, 1990
Oguejiofor, J.O. Philosophy and the African Predicament, Ibadan: Hope
Publications, 2001
Olabiyi Babalola Yai, Guest Editor: “Religion and Philosophy in Africa” African
Studies Quarterly, Volume 1, Issue 4 (1998)
Gyekye, Kwame (9 Sep 2010). “African Ethics”. The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. Fall 2011 Edition. Retrieved 7 October 2014.
Maurice MuhatiaMakumba, An Introduction to African Philosophy: Past and
Present (2007), p. 25, https://books.google.com/books?isbn=9966082964
Discussion Forum
State five parables in your context and give the philosophical analysis. Post
on the forum page.
72
Module 3 Logic
Introduction
This third module is made up of five (5) study units. (See below). It is a great
opportunity for you to know about the definition and scope of logic (unit 1).
This module will also teach you some basic concepts in logic such as
statement/proposition, premise, inference, conclusion, valid/invalid argument,
predicate, major, minor and middle term (unit 2 and 3). The fourth unit will
teach you the meaning of inductive and deductive argument and how to
identify them; how a deductive argument can be said to be valid or invalid,
sound or unsound, and, how an inductive argument can be said to be weak or
strong. The fifth and last unit will define language and state some of its
functions.
Unit 1 Definition and Scope of Logic
Unit 2 Logic’s Vocabulary I
Unit 3 Logic’s Vocabulary Ii
Unit 4 Valid, Invalid, Deductive and Inductive Arguments
Unit 5 Language and Its Functions
Unit 1 Definition and Scope of Logic
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Definition of Logic
3.2 Logical processes
3.3 The Relevance of logic
3.4 Logic and other disciplines
3.5 Classification of logic
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
The meaning and nature of logic as well as its relevance is crucial to the
discussion of logic. Although, it will require more effort from you, it remains
nevertheless the best channel that will help you to learn how to think critically.
Thus, in this study, you will learn the meaning nature and functions of logic,
the various processes of logic and their classifications, common errors in
73
reasoning that you would have to avoid, and effective techniques for
evaluating arguments.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to logic in philosophical thoughts.
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Definition of logic
Let us begin by considering the origin of the word ‘logic’. Etymologically, the
word ‘logic’ is derived from the Greek word logike, meaning “possessed of
reason, intellectual, dialectical, argumentative” (Fadahunsi & Adegboyega,
2010:94). Another account on the historical origin of logic says that it is from
the word logos. Logos is an ‘expression of reason or order in words or things,
principle, mathematical ratio, thought or simply ‘word’ (Ogbinaka, 2000:187).
In the history of philosophy, Parmenides was the first ancient Greek
philosopher that developed some logical principles, and these are the
principle of identity and the principle of non-contradiction. His logical construct
of ‘what is, and what is not’ gives rise to the Aristotelian conception of ‘Truth
functional logic’ (ibid). Although, he did not label his inferential analysis ‘logic’
but we can say that his metaphysical postulations provided the basis upon
which Aristotelian and modern logic developed.
Having discuss a little on the origin of logic, it is important to point out that
unlike philosophy itself, logicians seem to agree on what logic means or what
it is about. Although, logic has been variously defined by different scholars.
But then all this definition points towards the same subject matter of logic. For
instance, Aristotle sees logic as the scientific study of fundamental principles
of human thoughts and the laws that underline valid thought processes and
discourse (Uduigwomen & Ozumba, 1995:155). Copi defines logic as the
study of the methods and principles used in distinguishing good (correct) from
bad /incorrect reasoning (1972). On the other hand, Nancy sees logic “as the
science that appraises reasoning as correct or incorrect” (1990:3.4). Kahane
on his part defines logic as “an attempt to distinguish between correct (valid)
from incorrect (invalid) arguments” (1968:2). For Moses Oke, logic primarily
“is the study of methods and principles used to assess the strength of the
evidential link between the premises (supporting reasons) and conclusion
(Claims) or arguments” (Oke, 1999:165-166). Basically, you can notice that in
the above definitions the words which stand out clearly are reasoning and
argumentation. Therefore, we can say that the study of logic is the study of
correct and incorrect reasoning and arguments or that logic is the science of
reasoning.
3.2 Logical Processes
Simple apprehension, judgment, reasoning and argument constitute what we
call logical processes.
74
Simple Apprehension
Simple apprehension is the act by which the mind forms the concept of
something without affirming or denying anything about it. For instance, if I say
“look at that Ship” and stop there. This is a simple apprehension because I
have not said anything about the Ship. I have neither affirmed nor denied
anything about the Ship. Some philosophers and logicians have denied the
possibility of a simple apprehension. According to them, there is nothing like
simple apprehension.
Judgment in logic:
Judgment is known as the act by which the mind affirms or denies something
of something else. For instance, if I proceed to say “look, that ship is big” then
I have made a judgment by affirming the “bigness” of the Ship.
Reasoning and Argument
Reasoning and argument constitute the third and last stage of any logical
process. It is also known as the act by which the mind passes from one, two
or more judgments to a further judgment distinct from the preceding ones but
implicitly contained in them. Besides simple apprehension and judgment, logic
is strictly concerned with reasoning and argument.
3.3 The Relevance of Logic
Logic is of immense relevance so, it is very important to study it. It is the only
discipline that strictly lays down the rules which the mind must follow to arrive
at truth and thereby minimize if not totally eradicate error. In other words, logic
works as a guide through the critical thinking process. As a discipline it will
also equip you with the skills needed for effective and forceful presentation of
your views. It forces people to think about the outcome of propositions before
they ask questions. You need to know that until a beneficial question is
discovered it is impossible to start the critical thinking process. Critical thinking
involves asking many questions. The study of logic helps one to reason well
by illuminating the principle of correct reasoning, explaining them, justifying
them and exhibiting their effective use (Copi and Cohen, 2000: xiii). It helps
us to avoid claims for which we do not have enough reasons. It help us to
identify arguments where we might otherwise just see a set of unconnected or
loosely related statement (Oke, 1998:17) Bello (2000:vii), describes the
importance of logic when he asserts that a training in is an important one for
society like ours which is aspiring to democratic life, because in a democratic
society, persuasion, rather than coercion or force, is the method of winning
others to one’s point of view and in the business of persuading others,
arguments are important. But you must know that to logic is sometimes
perceived by its critics as a subject that has no practical use. This is not true.
The abstractness of logic does not make it irrelevant at all. Indeed, it is not
contradictory to say that logic is to life what oxygen is to life. We all need logic
in one way or the other, in one form or another. We all need logic to
communicate and interact in the society. Even to be illogical presupposes a
logical action or decision.
75
3.4 Logic and Other Disciplines
Logic is an important area of philosophy. It is the tool with which philosophers
performs their task of philosophizing. There is no way you can determine
correct or incorrect reasoning without constructing arguments. And logic,
being that branch of philosophy that draws the boundary between correct or
incorrect reasoning, is very essential to philosophers. Therefore, it is not even
an exaggeration to claim that logic is to philosophy what mathematics is to the
sciences. Logic is even at the background of mathematics. Apart from
philosophy, logic is important to other disciplines as well. Any good
sociologist, historian, lawyer, politician, physician and so on, requires the
services of logic like philosophy. So long as there is reason for arguments,
classification and ordering of things, logic is always needed. As earlier stated,
it is only logic that can bring light, the general laws and cannons to which
reason must conform. Otakpor passionately terms logic as the “Queen of all
disciplines” (1985:85-98). To him, it is obvious that “no scientist, historian,
lawyer, engineer, etc. can afford to present his/her work in a disorderly
manner and expect to be taken seriously because to be logical means to be
orderly” (2000:5).
3.5 Classification of Logic
Traditionally, logic is divided into two main branches namely formal and
informal logic, however, the study of logic has grown beyond these two to
include prepositional logic, deductive logic, inductive logic, mathematical logic,
Boolean logic fuzzy logic, modal logic, deontic logic and epistemic logic.
Formal Logic
Formal Logic is the study of inference with purely formal content, where that
content is made explicit. Formal logic is often used as a synonym for symbolic
logic. It is usually described as the logic of symbols and implication.
Informal Logic
This is the study of natural language arguments. The study of fallacies is an
important branch of informal logic. The dialogues of Plato (Plato, 1976) are a
good example of informal logic.
Mathematical Logic
This refers to two important areas of research and they are the application of
the techniques of formal logic to mathematics and mathematical reasoning,
and the other one is in the other direction, the application of mathematical
techniques to the representation and analysis of formal logic. It is an
extension of symbolic logic into other areas, to the study of model theory,
proof theory, set theory, and recursion theory.
76
Boolean logic
This type of logic deals with the basic operations of truth values.
Deductive logic
It is concerned with inferential reasoning that follows necessarily from given
premises. An inference is deductively valid if and only if the premise(s) follows
from the conclusion or if there is no reason for us to accept the premises as
true and reject the conclusion. In order words, the conclusion is derived from
the premises or that the premises provides adequate support for the
conclusion to hold.
Inductive Logic
This is the opposite of deductive logic. It is a logical process where a reliable
generalization from observations is derived. Inductive logical evaluation
require us to define a reliable generalization of some set of observations. To
provide such definition it may take the form of mathematical models of
probability. The process is such that the conclusion in any inductive reasoning
is not supported in absolute term by the series of observations made.
Prepositional Logic
This form of logic is concerned with testing the truth-value validity of
propositions through logical rules and principles. These includes, Truth Table
Analysis, Truth-value Tree Analysis, Formal Proof of Validity and Deductions.
Fuzzy Logic
This is related to fuzzy set theory in mathematics. It simply says that truth
values are not limited to truth or falsity. In this type of logic, what we have are:
’True’;’False’; ‘Rather false’; ‘Rather true’; ‘Not very true’; Not very false’;
‘More or less False’; ‘More or less true’ (Alozie, 2003:17).
Modal Logic
Modal logic deals with the phenomenon that sub-parts of a sentence may
have their semantics modified by special verbs or modal particles. For
example, “We go to the games” and perhaps “We will go the games”. More
abstractly, we might say the modality affects the circumstances in which we
take an assertion to be satisfied. According to Dele Balogun in Fadahunsi and
Adegboyega (2010:102), the logical modalities of modality includes deontic
and epistemic logic.
Epistemic Logic
This is the logic of knowledge and belief. It focuses on propositional
knowledge and provides insight into the properties of individual knowers
which has provided a means to model complicated scenarios involving groups
77
of knowers and has improved our understanding of the dynamics of inquiry.
You need to know that this form of logic has many applications in computer
science and economics.
Deontic Logic
This type of logic directly involves topics of considerable practical significance
such as morality, law, social and business organizations (their norms, as well
as their normative constitution), and security system.
4.0 Conclusion
There are different types of logic. These logics help in critical thinking and
analysis.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/yPRSS6APMq0
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Oke, M. (1999). “The social relevance of logic” in Achilike, J.C.(ED.)
Fundamentals of logic Ibadan: Ben-El Books.
Uduma, O. Uduma Logic and Critical Thinking, (2nd Edition) Ghana: Africa
Analytical Publications, 2015.
78
Unit 2 Logic’s Vocabulary I
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Statement or Proposition
3.2 Premise
3.3 Conclusion
3.4 Inference
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Reference/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit introduces you to some basic concepts’ logicians use. The unit
will focus particularly on statement, proposition, premise, conclusion and
inference.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to demonstrate the usage of logic
vocabulary in expressing human behaviour.
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Statement and Proposition
There is no difference between a statement and a proposition in logic. The
two terms are synonymous and thereupon interchangeable. However,
logicians differentiate between statement and sentence. To them, even
though the two terms are interwoven, they are not actually the same. For
instance, in everyday English, a sentence is a set of words expressing a
statement, a question or a command. Thus, whenever a sentence expresses
a statement without question or command it can also be called logical
statement. It should also be clear to you that in ordinary English, every logical
statement is a sentence. But, as stated earlier not every sentence is a logical
statement. It is only when a sentence can either be denied or asserted that is
qualified as logical statement or proposition. For example, the sentence
“Nigeria is rich” can be asserted as follows: yes Nigeria is rich. It can also be
denied by stating as follows: No, Nigeria is not rich. Thus, the sentence
“Nigeria is rich” because it can be asserted and can also be denied, is a
logical statement or proposition. Any sentence expressing questions,
commands etc. does not qualify as logical statement or proposition.
79
3.2 Premise
Premise is also one of the basic concepts in logic. It is known as evidence or
reason. Basically, a premise refers to that proposition or statement, within an
argument, which provides support for or grounds for asserting the conclusion
of that argument. (Meneye Eze, 2003:18). In a valid argument, the premises
imply the conclusion. Premise and conclusion are relative terms. Conclusion
does not necessarily mean the last sentence. The premise in an argument A
can be the conclusion in argument B and vice versa.
For example:
All men are mortal
Abiola is a man
Therefore, Abiola is mortal.
In this example, the first two statements or prepositions are the premises
while the lastone is the conclusion.
Premise – Indicators
These are words and expression that indicate the premises within an
argument. The following are some of the premise indicators. “since”, “for”,
“as”, “because”, “in as much as”, “for the following reason (s)”, “given that”, “in
addition”, “as shown by”, “beside”, etc… When a statement follows any of the
listed words that statement is a premise. For example, “since the Vice-
Chancellor is in School, there will be light today”, in any argument, the
statement or proposition that comes after the word “because” is usually a
premise for instance:
1. “There will be light today, because the Vice–chancellor is in school”
2. “Adamu will pass the test since he is ahead of his colleague in the
exercise, beside, he is
very brilliant”.
Whenever any of the above listed words is used, it simply means that the
sentence that follow is the premise of the argument. For example: there will
be light today for, the Vice-Chancellor is in School. You must know that the list
of premise locators cannot be exhausted. Those listed here are just few for
you to know how to identify premise or premises in any argument.
3.3 Conclusion
In logic, conclusion is that proposition, in an argument, that is arrived at on the
strength or basis of the information provided by the premises. Simply put,
conclusion means to come or brings to an end. You should always remember
that in any valid argument, the conclusion follows from the premises. For
instance:
1. All philosophy students are wise
80
Aina is a philosophy student
Therefore, Aina is wise
2. Abuja is in Nigeria
Nigeria is in Africa
Therefore, Abuja is in Africa
Here, the third preposition in each of the two examples “Aina is wise” and
Abuja is in Africa, are conclusions in each of the argument respectively. They
are arrived at based on the information provided by the first two prepositions,
which are the premises in the respective arguments.
Conclusion – Indicators
There are some expressions and words that function to indicate the
conclusion within a passage. These are generally called CONCLUSION –
INDICATORS. For example: “hence”, “consequently’, “therefore”, “it follows
that”, “accordingly”, “in sum”, “for these reasons”, “we may conclude”, “we
may infer”, “thus”, “so” etc. whenever any of these words begins a statement
or proposition, it is obvious that such proposition is a conclusion.
3.4 Inference
In logic, an inference is the process by which one proposition is arrived at and
affirmed based on one or more other propositions accepted as the starting
point of the process (Copi and Coker, 2003: 6). It is mainly a mental activity of
reaching a conclusion from a number of premises. For example:
All footballers are strong
Ronaldo is a footballer
Therefore, Ronaldo is strong
Here you can see that the conclusion “Ronaldo is strong” is inferred from the
first and second
premises of the argument, that is it is derived from the first and second
premises of the argument.
4.0 Conclusion
Statement and Proposition; premise, conclusion and inference are some of
the basic concepts logicians use. However, there is a difference between
statement/proposition and sentence.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
81
Video https://youtu.be/Og2Eq4LdhUU
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Stephen C. 2002. The Power of Logic. (2nd edition). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Neneye, E. P. 2003. Introduction to Logic and Philosophy. Owerri: Prosperity
Publishers.
O’Connor, D.J. and B. Powell. 1980. Elementary Logic. London: Hodder.
Otakpor, Nkeonye. 2000. A Preface to Logic. Benin City: Omone Books.
Uduma, O. Uduma Logic and Critical Thinking, (2nd Edition) Ghana: Africa
Analytical Publications, 2015.
82
Unit 3 Logic’s Vocabulary II
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Argument
3.2 Valid and Invalid Argument
3.3 Subject or Predicate Term
3.4 Major, Minor and Middle Terms
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit is the continuation of the preceding one (unit 2). It intends to
introduce you to some basic concepts logicians use. But it focuses particularly
on the definition, validity and invalidity of an argument; the subject or
predicate term and major, minor and middle terms.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Differentiate between valid and invalid arguments
• Demonstrate logical skills arguments.
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Argument
An argument is a group of propositions that can be structured into two parts
that ispremise(s)’, which is also known as ‘reason’ and ‘conclusion’ which can
also be known as ‘claim’. The premises which are some of the statements in
an argument is said to provide reason(s) for which the conclusion is affirmed.
The conclusion which is part of the statements in an argument is affirmed
based on the other statements, which are called premises. At least two
propositions or statements form an argument otherwise it is not argument. But
not all the statements are arguments. Some non-argumentative uses of
statements such as in reports, illustration, explanatory statements, conditional
statement etc…are sometimes confused with arguments.
As earlier stated, at least two statements or propositions form an argument. In
the case of two propositions only one must be the premise while the other
must be the conclusion. For instance:
“As soon as Ronaldo scores the second goal, the match ended.”
83
Here the conclusion is “the match ended” while the premise is “Ronaldo
scores the second goal”. The expression “as soon as” stands as premise –
indicator. When more than two propositions or statements form an argument,
one must be a conclusion while the others must be premises Example;
All women are caring
Ada is a mother
Therefore, Ada is caring
You should always remember that no matter how many premises form an
argument, an argument can never have more than one conclusion.
3.2 Valid and Invalid Arguments
An argument is said to be valid when the conclusion of that argument is
derived from or follows from the premises. In other words, in a valid argument,
it is necessary that if the premises are true, then the conclusion is true. Thus,
in any valid argument, there is an absolute connection between the premises
and the conclusion. In any valid argument, it is impossible for the conclusion
to be false when the premises are true, for example:
“All Americans are proud Peter is an American Therefore, peter is proud.”
What matters most here is the link between the premises and the conclusion
rather than on the truth or falsity of the statements comprising the arguments,
Example:
“All birds have beaks. Some cats are birds. So, some cats have beaks.”
Here you can see that although the second premise is false, the argument is
still valid. Because when the premises are assumed to be true the conclusion
must be true also. In logic proper, an argument can still be valid when all the
premises are false. For example:
“All men are monkeys. All monkeys are politicians. So all men are politicians.”
However, it is not also advisable to hastily conclude that an argument is valid
simply because its premises are all true. Example:
“Some Nigerians are bad. Ukwa is a Nigerian. Therefore, Ukwa is bad.”
An argument can have true premises and true conclusion but may not
necessarily be valid. Because sometimes, the premises may not support the
conclusion in the right way. “Are the premises actually true?” “Is the argument
valid?” These are two distinct and fundamental questions in logic. In logic
proper, validity only preserves truth but cannot preserve falsehood. In all, you
must know that a valid argument is concerned with the structure of the
argument and not the content. An invalid argument is the opposite of valid
84
one. But invalid argument has a peculiar characteristic: for instance: it is not
necessary that if the premises are true, then the conclusion is true.
In conclusion, any valid argument with all premises true is a sound argument.
Any valid argument with at least one false premise in an unsound argument.
All invalid arguments are unsound.
3.3 Subject or predicate Term
Remember that we can talk either of the subject term of a proposition or the
subject term of a syllogism or of an argument. But always remember that in
logic proper, you must talk of the subject term of a proposition. Syllogism is
more than a preposition syllogism is an argument that contains and must
contain three propositions, two of which are called the premises and one the
conclusion. A typical case of a syllogism is:
All Black women are beautiful
Cacy Ngamen is a black woman
Therefore, Cacy Ngamen is beautiful
In this syllogism “Cacy Ngamen is beautiful” is known as conclusion and it
necessarily follows from the first and second prepositions, which serve as
premises of the syllogism. You can see that a whole syllogism can neither be
asserted nor denied. But the sentence “Cacy Ngamen is beautiful” which
stands here as a preposition can be asserted or denied. As the subject of the
proposition it is called the subject term so “Cacy Ngamen is beautiful” is the
subject term of the above proposition.
As it is with the subject term, so it is with the predicate term. The logician does
not talk of the predicate term of an argument or syllogism. In logic, we talk of
the predicate term of a preposition. For instance, in the preposition ‘Cacy
Ngamen is beautiful,” the predicate of the preposition is ‘beautiful”. In
conclusion, you should always remember that in logic proper, subject and
predicate term are associated with individual propositions only. It does not
matter whether that individual proposition is a premise or a conclusion.
3.4 Major, Minor and Middle Terms Major Term
Major, minor and middle terms are all parts of a syllogism. But unlike
predicate or subject term as seen earlier, a logician can never talk of major,
minor or middle term of a reposition. For instance, in an argument or in a
syllogism, the predicate term of the conclusion becomes automatically the
major term of the syllogism. For example:
All Cameroonians are footballers.
Etoo is a Cameroonian.
Therefore, Etoo is a footballer.
“footballer” is the predicate term of the conclusion, in the above example. But
it automatically becomes the major term of the syllogism. So, “footballer” is
the major term of the syllogism. You should always remember also that in
85
logic, the premise containing the major of the syllogism is referred to as the
major premise of that syllogism. Thus, in the above example, the premise “all
Cameroonians are footballers”, which contains the major term of the syllogism
(footballer) becomes the major premise of the syllogism, because it contains
the major term of that syllogism.
Minor term
As it is with the major term, so it is with the minor term. That is, the logician
does not talk of the minor term of a proposition, but rather of the minor term of
a syllogism. Always remember that in any syllogism, the subject or the subject
term of the conclusion becomes automatically the minor term of that
syllogism, for instance:
All Cameroonians are footballers.
Etoo is a Cameroonian.
Therefore, Etoo is a footballer.
In the above example, Etoo is the subject term of the conclusion and it
automatically becomes the minor term of that syllogism. So Etoo is the minor
term of the above syllogism. In logic, the premise that contains the minor term
of the syllogism is called the minor premise of that syllogism. Thus, in the
above example the premise “Etoo is a Cameroonian” which contains the
minor term of the syllogism (Etoo) is called the minor premise because it
contains the minor term of that syllogism.
Middle Term
As it is with the major and minor terms, so it is with the middle term. That is,
the logician does not talk of the middle term of a proposition, but rather of the
middle term of a syllogism. Always remember that in any syllogism, the term
that occurs in both premises but does not occur in conclusion in called the
middle term of that syllogism. For instance:
All Cameroonians are footballers.
Etoo is a Cameroonian.
Therefore, Etoo is a footballer.
You can see that in the above syllogism,” Cameroonians” is the middle term
because the term (Cameroonian) occurs in both the major and minor
premises but does not occur in the conclusion.
4.0 Conclusion
Logicians argue with subject or predicate term with major emphasis on
predicate, subject, major, minor and middle terms.
86
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/m2NDduFCBDU
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Stephen C. 2000, The Power of Logic. (2nd edition), McGraw-Hill,.
Neneye, E. P. 2003, Introduction to Logic and Philosophy. Owerri: Prosperity
Publisher.
O’ Connor, D.J. and Powell B. 1980, Elementary Logic. London: Hodder.
Otakpor, N. 2000, A Preface to Logic. Benin City: Omone Books.
87
Unit 4 Valid, Invalid, Deductive and Inductive Arguments
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Inductive Argument
3.2 Deductive Arguments
3.3 Valid Arguments
3.4 Weak and strong inductive argument
3.5 Sound and unsound argument
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Reference/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit introduces you to the analysis of inductive and deductive
arguments. It will also teach you how a deductive argument is said to be valid
or invalid, how an inductive argument is said to be weak or strong. This study
unit will also teach you how to define and differentiate between sound and
unsound argument.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to
• Differentiate between a valid and Invalid deductive argument
• Differentiate between weak and strong inductive arguments
• Differentiate between sound and unsound arguments
• Evaluate arguments in different contexts
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Inductive argument
An inductive argument is that kind of argument that its premise(s) only
support, but do not guarantee its conclusion. Inductive argument does not
claim that their premises, even if true, support their conclusions with certainty.
Furthermore, in any inductive mode of reasoning, the conclusion logically
implies an item of information not necessarily implied by the premises; “and
that which can be confirmed or refuted only on the basis of evidence drawn
from sense experience” (Ade-Ali, 2000:265). You also need to know that
inductive argument is structured in such way that from one set of propositions
(premises), it moves to another (conclusion); also proceeds from the
experienced (particular) to the inexperienced (general); from the known to the
unknown. For instance;
88
Mr. Roger Miller is a Cameroonian and a football player.
Mr. Etoo Fils is a Cameroonian and a football player.
Mr. Rigobert Song is a Cameroonian and a football player. Therefore,
All Cameroonians are football players.
You can see that in the above example, the conclusion that all Cameroonians
are football players (general proposition) is arrived at by sampling some
members of the class of persons who are Cameroonians. But for some
logicians (Minimah & Inoka, 1997) there are also some “cases in which the
propositions of an inductive argument which are used as premises and
conclusions may all be either general propositions or particular prepositions”.
This is evident in the following arguments:
A. All birds grow from infancy to adulthood
All trees grow from infancy to maturity
All men grow from infancy to adulthood
Therefore, all living things grow infancy to adulthood (Minimah and
Inoka, 1997:72).
B. Idi Amin was a dictator and was ruthless
Samuel Doe was a dictator and was ruthless
Kabila is a dictator,
Therefore, Kabila is ruthless.
Other facts that you must know about inductive arguments are; (a) all
inductive arguments are invalid. This is because the premises do not support
the conclusion. (b) the support offered by the premises of an inductive
arguments to their conclusion is either high (strong) or low (weak) or none at
all. For example:
Inductive arguments with high degree of support for conclusion:
Almost all footballers are rich
J.J. Okocha is a footballer
It follows that J.J Okocha is rich
Inductive arguments with premises offering low support for conclusion:
Dangote worked hard and became rich
Otedola worked hard and became rich
Saraki worked and became rich
Therefore, all who worked hard will become rich
Inductive argument that do not support their conclusion
Iron, a metal conduct electricity
Copper, a metal conduct electricity
Aluminium, a metal conduct electricity
Therefore all metals expands when heated
89
3.2 Deductive Argument
Logicians define deductive argument as that kind of argument in which the
premises do not only support but also guarantee the conclusion. In other
words, the conclusion is directly inferred from the premises. It also means that
the conclusion does not contain any new information aside those that we
already have in the premises. Like what we have for inductive arguments, we
also have different type of deductive arguments depending on the form the
arguments take. We have those that move from general propositions as
premises to a proposition as the conclusion. Example:
(i) All NOUN Students have matriculation number
Adegboyega is a NOUN Student
Therefore, Adegboyega has matriculation number
(ii) All lawyers are liars
Yakubu is a lawyer
Therefore, Yakubu is a liar
We also have those that move from general propositions to a general
proposition as the conclusion. Example:
(i) All lecturers are Saints
All Saints will go to heaven
Therefore, all lectures will go to heaven
3.3 Valid and Invalid Deductive Argument
A deductive argument is said to be valid if and only if (a) the premises imply
the conclusion or (b) the premises entail the conclusion; or (c) the conclusion
follows from the premises; or (d) the premises necessitate the conclusion; or
(e) The conclusion can be inferred from the premises. It should be clear to
you then that a valid deductive argument is an argument in which if you
accept the premises to be true, you cannot deny or reject the conclusion. If
you do so, you will be running into contradiction. You should also know that in
logic proper, the words “true” or “false” are used to qualify statements or
propositions. While “valid” or “invalid” are used to qualify arguments. In other
words, we talk of “true” or “false” statements or propositions and “valid” or
“invalid” arguments.
On the other hand, an invalid deductive argument is one that the premises do
not support the conclusion. In other words, the conclusion cannot be inferred
from the premises or that the premises do not necessitate the conclusion.
Invariably, you can accept the premises of the deductive argument to be true
and reject the conclusion without running into any problem.
90
3.4 Weak and strong inductive arguments
As noted earlier, valid or invalid are words used to qualify deductive
arguments and while all inductive argument is said to be invalid, ‘weak’ or
‘strong’ are used to qualify inductive arguments. As stated earlier, on inductive
argument is based on probability. That is why logicians rather use the words
weak and strong. In an inductive argument, the words strong and weak are
used to indicate the level and strength of evidence or data used as premises
and the degree of certainty contained in the conclusion. Any inductive
argument is based on probability. Therefore, its weakness or strength
depends on the degree of evidence contained in the conclusion.
3.5 Sound and Unsound Argument
First, the words “sound” and “unsound” have nothing to do with an invalid and
inductive argument. They are only used to qualify a valid (deductive)
argument. In point of facts, all inductive arguments are unsound. Also, bear in
mind that before an argument becomes sound or unsound it must be first of
all valid. Thus, only a valid argument is said to be sound. A valid deductive
argument is said to be sound if the premises of that argument as well as the
conclusion are all true prepositions. On other hand, a valid argument is said to
be unsound if the premises of that argument are either all false or contain a
mixture of true and false prepositions, notwithstanding the truth value of its
conclusion (Minimah and Inoka, 1997:74). Why is it possible that a deductive
argument with false premises can be described as valid? Minimah and Inoka
give us a simplified answer: The point is that the validity or invalidity of an
argument does not depend upon the truth or falsity of its premises; since an
argument (deductive) is said to have a pattern or structure or form, an
argument is thereby valid if it conforms or tallies with that structure or form or
pattern. (1997:74). In a deductive reasoning, the pattern or structure is what
we mean by words such as imply, necessitate, followed by, entail etc. Minimal
and Inoka further insist that “these words point to the fact that it is impossible
for the premises of an argument to be all true while the conclusion is false.
Once that happens then that argument is invalid” (1997:75). However, in their
own understanding, “those words did not say that the premises could be a
mixture of true and false propositions or false prepositions throughout while
the argument still remain valid” (1997:75) Therefore, as stated earlier, the
words sound and unsound only show the truth value of the premises
contained in any argument. For example:
a. All NOUN students are dullard
All dullards will make heaven
Therefore, all NOUN students will make heaven
b. All Nigerians are Africans
All Africans are whites
Therefore, all Nigerians are whites.
91
You can see that in example (a), both the two premises plus the conclusion
are false propositions yet the argument is valid, because the conclusion
necessarily follows from the premises. Again, in example (b), the first
premises has a true proposition, the second has a false proposition, while the
conclusion is also expressed in a false proposition. But here again, the
argument is valid because despite the falsity of the second premise and the
falsity of the conclusion, the conclusion is validly derived from the combination
of the false and true premises. So, in both examples (a) and (b), the
arguments are valid but unsound. Unsound in the sense that the valid
arguments have false premises and false conclusion, and in the second
example, it has one true premises and one false premise with a false
conclusion. Where a valid argument has all its premises and conclusion as
true propositions, then that valid argument is also a sound argument.
However, you should always bear in mind that the fact that an argument has
all its premises true does not necessarily mean that it must be valid. It is
possible to an argument to remain invalid even if all its premises are true. For
example:
All boys are dressed in shirts
Some girls are dressed in shirts
Therefore, some girls are boys
Thus, any argument in which all the premises are true but has the conclusion
as false
preposition must be an invalid argument.
4.0 Conclusion
In philosophy, there are valid and invalid, weak and strong, sound and
unsound arguments.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/fPy6aKodisY
Audio
92
6.0 References/Further Reading
Ade-Ali, S. 2003. Logic made easy. Ijebu-Ode: Vicoo International Press.
Achilike, J.C. 1999. Fundamentals of Logic, Ibadan: BEN-EL Publishers.
Copi, I.M. 2003. Introduction to Logic. 4 edition. New York: Macmillan.
Minimah, F. & Inoka, V. 1997. A Concise Introduction to Philosophy and
Logic. Ikot-Ekpene: Belpot.
93
Unit 5 Language and Its Functions
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Functions of language
3.2 Some Models of Linguistic Analysis
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit will introduces you to the definition and function of language. It
will also teach you some models of linguistic Analysis.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOS)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Analyse the functions of language
• Evaluate some models of linguistic analysis.
2.0 Main Content
3.0 Logic and Language
Generally, you need to understand that the definition of logic as the science of
laws of thought imply a mutual relationship between logic and language. This
position is informed by the fact that processes of thought rely on logic to thrive
and language on the other hand is better understood when logical processes
are applied to remove ambiguity, vagueness and enhance clarity of thought
on one hand and the use of language on the other hand. The dependency of
logic and language on each other is reciprocal, as thought is believed to be
prior to language but its (thought) process is made possible through
embodying itself in language. This has made language to be vital to the
development of logic. In other words, the mastery of language enhances
logical discussions. as evident in the philosophies of the Sophists, Plato,
Aristotle, etc.
It is important for you to note that logic is concerned with different forms of
expression in language, but only in so far as they embody differences of type
in the process of thinking. This position is further stressed by Uduma O.
Uduma that since logic considers language essentially as an instrument of
thinking, its aim is to handle the instrument so-as-to- make it a help and not a
hindrance to correct thinking (Uduma 2015).
94
Aside from what we have said above about logic and its connection with
language, it is equally important for you to know that as a primary tool of
reason, language enhances the description and organization of human
numerous experiences and make them to access the experience of other
people. The human capability for language does not only distinguish them
from other animals, it also gives them logical ability. Therefore, it is through
the possession of language by human beings that their thought and conduct
are made possible. Also, their possession of language enables them to
organize their experiences systematically and produce valid inferences
because with language they are well equipped with logical ability.
Perhaps one should make you to understand that language is a social
product. Its most obvious function therefore goes beyond the provision of a
framework for thought but also to serve as means of communicating and
gives thought meaning. However, this position should not be taken to mean
that without language thoughts cannot be meaningful rather, language is
simply been presented as a necessity in society for the proper conveyance of
human thought. In short, the relevance of language underpins its facilitation of
intelligent co-operation in all human endeavour and the enhancement of
civilization in human society.
3.1 Functions of Language
Asan important aspect of human culture, language has unlimited functions.
This view is corroborated by Wittgenstein a philosopher of language in his
work Tractatus (See Uduma: 2015). Some of the uses of language he gave
includes- giving orders and obeying them, describing the appearance of an
object or giving its measurement, constructing an object from a description
and many others. From Wittgenstein point of view, the functions of language
have been classified into three headings, that is, Informative, Expressive
and Evocative. We shall discuss each of these functions one after the other.
3.2 Informative Function
Here, the sole purpose of language is to communicate information. Language
states fact, i.e. it gives information about fact. When language is used to
describe the state of affair about a thing, event or situation, either it affirms or
deny the affair language is said to be performing the informative function.
Accordingly, science could be a good example of the informative function of
language because it deals with what is factual. Thus, the following example,
‘Politics is a game’. ‘Nigeria is a country’ states nothing else but facts as
information is been given about “Politics” and “Nigeria”. You should
understand that information could be inform of a proposition or an argument.
The information above can either be true of false, in which case we shall be
talking about ‘true and false proposition’. It could also be a misinformation and
when it is considered in the realm of argument, we shall be talking about
correct and incorrect argument.
However, irrespective of the status of the information, that is whether true,
correct or otherwise, what is paramount is that it gives an information and the
95
informative function of language is concerned with the truth value of the
proposition. Therefore, the informative function of language is important to
logic.
3.3 Expressive function
Here, the sole purpose of language is to report feelings or attitudes of a
person, writer, and speaker or to evoke feelings in the reader or listener.
Thus, the expressive function of language is not about factual report of a state
of affair but with expression of some sort of emotion. Language therefore
performs the expressive function whenever it is used to arouse feelings or
emotions which could be approval or disapproval (Uduma:2015). For
instance, the common reference to black African man as niggers by the
Westerners always arouse an emotion of disapproval, unlike when they are
referred to as “black man” which often elicit some emotion of approval.
The expressive function of language is commonly used in political and
religious discourses, warfare, science, etc. And best example of the
expressive use of language is found in poetry. Consider the lines of this song
from a soloist:
Amazing grace,
how sweet it sound
That save a wretch, like me
I once was lost
But now ‘am found
Was blind, but now I see
The above is not an information but an expression of a feeling of an unmerited
favour. From the above, it can be pointed out to you that the expressive
function of language reveals the internal state of mind of a person, feelings
and attitude and emotions. It is the kind of language function that is
sometimes referred to as emotional language function. It is either, it evokes
certain feelings or it express feelings and it can both evoke and express
feelings.
3.4 Directive Function
This function of language is also known as evocative function. It is to cause
(or prevent) an overt action. The utterance in a directive function of language
operate as to evoke action from the hearer. The sense in which the word
evoke is been used here is broader than in the expressive function of
language. Here, the word evoke means to provoke or cause an overt action,
to produce an action. This use is not the same as we have in the expressive
function where the word evoke means to excite emotions or feelings, that is to
cause, to express a feeling, an emotion or an attitude.
The sole purpose of language under directive function is to produce action.
Thus, when a father tells his child “go and clean the floor” the intention is not
to communicate any information nor is it to express or evoke any emotion or
96
feeling; it is intended to produce action, and that is for the child to clean the
floor. Another example is when a policeman orders a person “go and park
there”.
We need to note here that directive function of language can be understood
from three angles of a command, request and interrogation. The first two
examples can be treated as commands, however it can be change to a
request when a subtle means is introduced. For instance, when the word
please is added, it becomes a request, e.g. “please go and park there” direct.
The third sense which interrogative is usually inform of questions. For
example, “where were you?” this is a directive requesting an answer.
You need to know that directive function of language does not any form of
investigation on its truth value. This is because a command like “Get out!” can
neither be true nor false. But then, a directive function of language may be
definite, confused, either obeyed or disobeyed or disregarded in its command
sense; it may be untimely, unauthorized, obliged or unexpected. Furthermore,
in both the request and command sense it may be specific, reasonable,
genuine, improper and sham, unspecific and proper.
3.5 Mixed functions of language
This function of language is arrived at because, it is observed that discourse
can serve more than one function. In fact, most ordinary discourse are mixed
and aside this, effective communication demand and are made possible by
combinations of different functions of language.
When we give information to a group of trainees on the meaning of a concept,
such that the information is describing certain phenomena or procedure
prescribing or explaining the application of certain rules or terms, the
information may also express and evoke sentiments or feelings, such
information is therefore serving the expressive function, and may also seek to
cause certain appropriate actions from the group. When we also consider
sermons that are preached, generally, sermons are directive and are meant to
shape or turn the hearers to a particular way of life as contained in it (sermon)
and possibly to avoid an unacceptable lifestyle, it is also may evoke feelings
of awesomeness or admiration in the hearers , thus serving the expressive
function, and may also include some information about historical events or
other variable phenomena. An example of such sermon was Stephen’s
address before the Sanhendrin ( Acts of the Apostles chapter 7)
It is therefore possible for language to serve multiple functions. But, this not to
say that the specific roles of language in certain discourses are valueless or
less important. While in a discourse like biology, it is informative, in literary
works it is expressive but in logic it is directive. Language also serves as
directive in law that is to direct conduct.
97
3.6 Performative Utterances
This use of language is generally associate with a mixed function of language
and sometimes with the informative function of language. As the name
suggest, performative utterances refer to language which performs the action
it reports. It is a different form of function of language.
The term was first introduced by J.L Austin in 1955. It includes such
statements like “I promise to visit you tomorrow”, “I shall contest the next
election,” etc. these utterances do not describe or report anything, hence they
cannot be true or false. Each of them only constitutes doing something: visit
you tomorrow, contest the next election. These sorts of utterances only
involve doing, they cannot be true or false, but Austin maintained that they
can be infelicitous that is abused. According to Uduma (2015), the abuse of
these utterances however depends largely on the motive, circumstances or
condition surrounding the utterances. For instance, the promise to visit may
be made from insincerity or I may not be qualifying to context any election.
The main characteristics of performative utterances that attract philosophical
interest are as follows:
1. It offers counter- instance to the verifications claim that only
meaningful sentences are those which express true or false
statements.
2. It belongs to the category of non-descriptive sentences; they are
neither true nor false, but only felicitous or infelicitous.
3. It can do justice to the communicative and intentional aspects of
language.
The main thrust of performative function of language is that stating is
performing; saying is doing. When uttered in appropriate circumstances, they
perform the act it appears to report or describe, they are tied in special ways
to the circumstances in which they are uttered, and this is what doing justice
to the communicative and intentional aspect of language means.
4.0 Conclusion
From the study of the functions of language in this unit, the various functions
of language seem to correlate with the different forms of language. Thus, the
declarative sentences appear to be informative; the imperatives are directive;
interrogatives are directive and the exclamations are expressive. It may
therefore be somehow difficult to identify form with function in language.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
98
Video https://youtu.be/p4r0LlSGzZU
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Otakpor, N. 2000. A Preface to Logic. Benin City: Omone Books.
Uduma, O. Uduma. Logic and Critical Thinking, (2nd Edition) Ghana: Africa
Analytical Publications, 2015.
Discussion Forum
Using logic, state and analyse five sentences from different scenario. Post
your answer on the Forum.
99
Module 4 Fallacies and Definitions
Unit 1 Fallacies (Part One)
Unit 2 Fallacies (Part Two)
Unit 3 Definitions (Part One)
Unit 4 Definitions (Part Two)
Unit 5 Categorical Propositions Contents
Unit 1 Fallacies (Part One)
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Definition and Classification Of Fallacies
3.2 Fallacies Involving Irrelevant Premises
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit introduces you to the definition and classification of fallacies.
Our emphasis here will be particularly on fallacies involving irrelevant
premises.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Classify fallacies
• Evaluate fallacies.
It is hoped that at the end of this unit, you should be able to: -Define and
classify fallacies-Know major Formal fallacies such as; Affirming the
Consequent, - Denying the Antecedent, -Fallacy of Four Terms, -Existential
Fallacy and Fallacy of Exclusive Premises.
100
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Definition and Classification of fallacies
Some arguments sometimes look so good and convincing, however, when we
critically examine them, we realize that they are weak, deceptive, strong or full
of errors. What logician therefore always do is to explain the causes of errors
in arguments and to avoid them in reasoning. The best way to do this is to first
recognize these errors of reasoning and avoid them completely. This is
because, deceptive arguments are capable of misleading. You need to know
that these kinds of reasoning sometimes look convincing and logically correct,
without adequate carefulness one can accept them as true, valid and correct
reasoning. These forms of reasoning are regarded as being fallacious.
One fact that you must note here is that fallacious argument or reasoning is
not necessarily an invalid argument. Rather it is an argument that appears
sufficiently acceptable, but which contains errors (Oke and Audu, 2006:107).
Usually, a fallacy is committed in the process of moving from the premises of
an argument to its conclusion. Because of these errors or mistakes, the
premises do not justify the conclusion, or there is no proper link between the
premises and the conclusion. In short, a fallacy is an error in reasoning that
tends to be psychologically persuasive. It is an invalid argument that has the
deceptive appearance of being valid.
According to Uduma O. Uduma (2015), the classification of fallacies can be
dated back to Aristotle who gave two principal divisions namely (a) fallacies
due to the misuse of language and (b) those which arose from defects of
thought rather than of language. But the common classification are Formal
Fallacies and Informal Fallacies.
3.1.1 Formal Fallacies
This kind of fallacies are concerned with the structure or form of an argument,
rather than the content. Formal fallacies are also called Pure Fallacy what you
must note about arguments in this fallacy is that they always violate a rule of
the logical system of which the argument is a part. In this regard, invalid
deductive argument is formally fallacious. Thus, formal fallacies are error(s)
that evolve from neglect or deviation from formal rule of logic, which simply
holds that premises must adequately support the conclusion and that if the
premises of an argument is true, the conclusion must also be true.
Three examples of these fallacies are:
i. The formal fallacy associated with the deviation from the Modus
Ponens rule. This is called the fallacy of affirming the
consequent
ii. The formal fallacy that is associated with the deviation from the
Modus Tollens’ rule which is also known as the fallacy of
denying the antecedent.
iii. The formal fallacy of Four Term
iv. Existential Fallacy
v. Formal fallacy of Exclusive Premises
101
3.1.2 Fallacy of Affirming the Consequent
This is committed when the formal rule of affirming the antecedent or Modus
Pollens is violated. You should know that the antecedent of any argument is
the first part of the argument while the consequent is the latter part. They are
like Cause and Effect. The rule of Modus Ponens states that in an argument,
if a material conditional statement (the first premise), and its antecedent (the
second premise) are true, then its consequent must be true (Achilike, 1999:
16). Thus, in the fallacy, the second premise of the argument affirms the
consequent instead of the antecedent while the conclusion affirms the
antecedent rather than the consequent. For example:
If Tinubu is a leader then Tinubu is a politician
Tinubu is a politician
Therefore, Tinubu is a leader
Schematically, we have
If p then q
Q
Therefore, p
Here the argument runs contrary to the rules of Modus Ponens.
Commonsensical, the second premise and the conclusion are faulty when
compared to a properly constituted Modus Ponens rule. It is possible that
Tinubu is not a leader and yet he may be a politician. This is shown below:
If Tinubu is a leader then Tinubu is a politician
Tinubu is a leader
Therefore, Tinubu is a politician
Schematically, we have
If p then q
P
Therefore q
In this argument, unlike the first, the second premise is an affirmation of the
Antecedent.
3.1.3 Fallacy of Denying the Antecedent
This fallacy occurs when the rule of Modus Tollens is violated the rule of
Modus Tollens holds that in an argument, if the material conditional statement
(first premise) is true, and its consequent is false, then its antecedent
(conclusion) must be false. The fallacy of denying the Antecedent takes the
form of an argument in which one premise is a conditional and the other is the
negation of its antecedent from which the negation of the consequent is
deduced as the conclusion of the argument. For example:
If Tinubu is a leader then Tinubu is a politician
102
Tinubu is not a politician
Therefore, Tinubu is not a leader
Schematically we have
If p then q
Not p
Therefore not q
From this example, the second premise and conclusion are faulty.
3.1.4 Fallacy of Four Term
An argument in a categorical logic commits the fallacy of four terms if either
there are more than three terms in the argument, or a term is assigned
different meanings at different points in the argument.
3.1.5 Existential Fallacy
In categorical logic, a syllogistic argument commits the existential fallacy if its
conclusion is a ‘particular’ proposition and both of its premises are ‘universal’
propositions. It is fallacious to derive a conclusion of a proposition from the
argument whose premises are universal propositions. For example:
All Nigerians are human beings
All human beings are mortal
Therefore, Dele Giwa, a Nigerian was mortal
3.1.6 Fallacy of Excusive Premises
This fallacy occurs in any form of reasoning when the rule that every valid
categorical syllogism must have at least one affirmative premise (A or I) is
violated. The major characteristic of the fallacy of Exclusive Premises is that
both premises are negative propositions (E or O). For example:
No goats are human beings
Some human beings are not rational
Therefore, some goats are not rational
3.2.0 Informal Fallacies
This fallacy is also known as material fallacy. It is informed of any argument
that is psychologically persuasive but not logically persuasive. In informal
fallacies, there are no mistakes in the formal structure of arguments rather,
they are rooted in the failure of the evidence to be relevant to the conclusion
or in some injustice and ambiguity (Adegboyega, 2010: 71). Informal fallacies
rests on the content of the argument. Unlike formal fallacy, no any coded rules
is violated. Individuals may fall into this error because of his or her
carelessness, coupled with inattention or being misled by language problems.
There are different types of informal fallacies and these are:
i. Fallacies of Ambiguity,
103
ii. Fallacies of Weak Induction,
iii. Fallacies of Relevance; and
iv. Fallacies of Presumption.
For this section, we shall focus on fallacies of Ambiguity and fallacies of
relevance. the remaining two fallacies of Weal Induction and fallacies of
Presumption shall be in the subsequent unit
3.2.1 Fallacies of ambiguity
These are linguistic fallacies. These fallacies occur when ambiguous words,
phrase or statements occur in arguments without carefully attending to the
ambiguity. You must know that ambiguous words are words that has more
than one meaning in a statement or when it can be used in more than one
way. For instance, the word “file” can be used to refer to metal tool with
roughened surface or cover case for keeping papers together for reference
purpose and it can refer to line of persons or one behind the other.
We shall focus here only on the four (04) major fallacies of ambiguity.
1. Fallacy of Equivocation: There are some words that contain more than
one meaning. The fallacy of equivocation occurs when such a word is
used in a manner that implies different meanings or senses of the word
within the same context. For instance: only man is rational. But no woman
is a man. Therefore, no woman is rational. This is a fallacy of equivocation
because the word “man” is used with two different senses within the same
context. In the first sentence, the word “man” means “humans” while in the
second, it means “male humans”.
2. Fallacy of Amphiboly:The fallacies of amphiboly and ambiguity are very
similar. The only difference is that in the fallacy of amphiboly, the double
meaning is due to syntactic or sentence structure such as a grammatical
error or a mistake in punctuation. The fallacy of amphiboly is more subtle
and harder to detect than that of Equivocation. It mostly occurs when we
misinterpret someone’s original statement or intention. Here are typical
cases. “Tunde removed the egg from the cup. So, Samuel broke it.”
Although, we know the meaning of the word ‘it’, but what this word refers
to is not clear to us. What did Samuel break? Is it the glass cup or the
egg?
3. Fallacy of composition:There are two major ways of committing the
fallacy of composition. These are: 1.) When a part is identified with the
whole. That is, the parts have the attribute “X” therefore the whole has
attribute “X”. For instance, i.) Each of the parts of this car engine is very
light, therefore the car engine is very light. ii.) Each player on the football
team is outstanding. Hence, the team itself is outstanding. The fallacy of
composition is committed here because even though the car engine is
made up of very light parts but when put together the car engine itself
becomes very heavy. It is the same with the football team. Even though
each of the players is outstanding and there is a lack of team work or
104
insufficient opportunity to practice together the team may not be
outstanding. 2.) The second kind of the fallacy of composition is committed
when there is confusion between the “distributive” and “collective” use of
general terms, for example:
Elephants eat more than humans. So, elephant taken as a group eat more
than humans taken as a group”. There is a fallacy of composition here
because in the premises: “Elephant eat more than humans”, the attribute
of “eating more than” is predicated distributively, that is, each individual
elephant is said to eat more than any individual human eats. However, in
the conclusion, the attribute “eating more than” is predicated collectively;
that is, elephant taken as a group are said to eat more than humans taken
as a group which is not true. Because there are so many more humans
than elephant.
4. Fallacy of Division
The fallacy of division is nothing more than the opposite of composition. In
the fallacy of division, if the whole has the attribute “X”, therefore the parts
must have the attribute “X” as well.
Example: “the airplane is heavy, so each of its part is heavy”. There is a
fallacy of division here because some of the parts of a heavy air plane may be
very light. Here is an example of the second type of division fallacy;
the soccer team is excellent. Hence, each member of the team is excellent.
There is a fallacy of division here because a team may be excellent due to
team work and few outstanding players and yet have members who are not
themselves excellent players.
3.2.2 Fallacies of Relevance
These fallacies present the premises of arguments in such a way that their
conclusion could be doubted. That is, given the premises of an argument, we
do not have a strong conviction or confidence for accepting the conclusion of
such argument. Some of these fallacies are discussed below:
A. Fallacy of Attacking the person (Argumentum ad Hominem)
The main business of this fallacy is to attack the person who advances an
argument rather than providing a rational critique of the argument itself. The
attacker’s main objective is to make it assertion acceptable. This fallacy is
informed of character assassination. For instance:
Mr. A: President Umaru Musa Yar’Adua of the Federal Territory of Nigeria will
be the next African Union Chairman
Mr. B: Mr. Umaru Musa Yar’Adua is the president of one of the most
corrupted countries in the world.
Therefore, it is impossible for him to become the future African union
105
chairman.
An argument against the person does not always involve outright verbal
abuse. Subtle ways are sometimes used but with the sole aim of discrediting
an opponent by suggesting that the opponent’s judgment is distorted by some
factor in his or her circumstances.
This form of argument is sometimes called the circumstantial ad hominem.
For instance, during the celebration of their marriage, Mr. and Mrs. Kule
refused to serve beer to their guests. They claimed that no born-again child of
God would either drink or serve beer to other persons. Here, you can see that
Mr. and Mrs. Kunle commit the circumstantial form of the argument and
hominem fallacy. You should always remember that the attack in the
argument against the person can take three forms:
i. Abusive: direct personal attack on the opponent.
ii. Circumstantial: attempt to discredit by calling attention to the
circumstances or situation of the opponent.
iii. Tu quoque: this is committed when in an argument, rather than
defending oneself, the arguer is being found guilty.
iv. The fallacy of attacking affiliation: this is occurring when in an
argument, it is concluded that a people should either be accepted or
rejected because he belongs to a group or association which one does
not like or that is unpopular with one’s audience.
b. Appeal to Force (Argumentum ad Baculum)
The word Baculum is a Latin word which stands for “staff”. Here, the word
‘Staff’ is seen as a symbol of power. Argumentum ad Baculum fallacy is
mostly used whenever a conclusion is defended by a threat to the well- being
of those who do not accept it. The threat can be physical, moral or
psychological. It can be implicit or explicit. Here is the case of a physical
threat: “Godwin, I don’t want to see you driving any car to campus whenever
you have my class. Do you realize I am your teacher and I am the alpha and
omega of this course? I am the one who will determine whether you pass or
fail at the end of the semester. It is better you comply or else you will fail this
course” You can see here that there is no logical link the threatened “you will
fail” on the conclusion. Of course you will agree that there is nothing bad in
Godwin a car to campus. But it is probable that the threat might induce
Godwin to accept the conclusion. Another example is the case of a
psychological threat: “Listen, Valerie, I know you disagree with my view about
the building project. You have made your disagreement clear to everyone.
Well, it time for you to see that you are mistaken. Let me get right to the point.
I know you have been lying to your husband about where you go on
Wednesday afternoons. Unless you want him to know where you really go, its
time for you to realize that I have been right about the building project all long.
You follow me?” (Layman, 2002, p. 127). You can see here that even though
the threat to expose the lie has no relationship with the building project, it may
still work because fear is a strong motivator, and it can influence, some one’s
thinking.
106
c. Appeal to Popular feeling/ Mob Appeal (Argumentum ad Populum)
Remember that “Populum” is a Latin word with stands for “people” or “notion”
so argumentum ad populum occurs when you try to persuade someone or a
group by appealing to their emotion, feeling and sentiments. This is mostly
used in political campaigns, public debates and advertising. Here is a typical
case of political campaign: “I look out at you all, and I tell you, I am proud to
be here. Proud to belong to a party that stands for what is good for America.
Proud to cast my lot with the kind of people who make this nation great. Proud
to stand with men and women who can get our nation back on its feet. Yes,
there are those who criticize us, who label our view of trade agreements as
‘protectionist’. But when I look at you hard- working people, I know we are
right, and the critics are wrong” (Layman, 2002: 128).
You can see that the sole purpose of this speech is to persuade the crowd no
matter what. It is fallacious because the premises to the effect that “I am
proud to be associated with you” and “you are hardworking people” are
irrelevant to the conclusion: “our view of trade agreements is right”. Also bear
in mind that you do not necessarily need to address a large group before you
commit this kind of fallacy. Whatever you try to convince by appealing to the
need of or acceptance of your view by other people, makes you to commit the
fallacy. Here is an example: Miss Riley, are you saying that President Bush
made a moral error when he decided to go to war with Iraq? I cannot believe
my ears. That is not how Americans feel. Not true Americans, anyway. You
are an American, aren’t you Miss Riley? (Layman 2002: 128).
This is a fallacy because there is no logical connection between the fact that
Miss Riley is an American therefore Iraq war must be justified.
d. Appeal to pity (Argumentum ad Misericordiam)
Misericordiam is a Latin word that stands for “pity” or mercy”. So, argumentum
ad misericordiam is a fallacy that attempt to support a conclusion simply by
evoking pity in one’s audience even though the statements that evoke the pity
are logically unrelated to the conclusion. For example: “I want to build more
schools, more hospitals, and create more employment opportunity. If you
don’t vote for me this second term, I cannot achieve these, therefore vote for
me the second term” (Adegboyega, 2010: 79). The appeal to pity is mostly
used by politicians during campaign for election and by lawyers. The lawyer’s
main objective is to get the court to accept the conclusion that a client is
innocent or at least to obtain a reduction in the measure of punishment.
e. Fallacy of Irrelevant conclusion (Ignoratio Elenchi)
This fallacy is also celled fallacy of ignoring the issue. This is because the
conclusion that is drawn in the argument is irrelevant to the premises, i.e. non
sequitur. For example: “The members of the National Assembly have been
accused of official misconducts. Therefore, the Assembly complex should be
closed down”
107
f. Red-Herring Fallacy
It is committed when the person responding to an argument fails to address
whichever issue(s) the arguer has raised. In a way, the respondent distracts
the arguer’s attention because the respondent is evasive. Example:
Okon: “The use of condom during sex should be encouraged. This is
because it prevents un wanted pregnancy among youths”
Ekket: Mr Okon, are you a Christian or a Muslim?
Okon: I am neither a Christian nor a Muslim. I am a traditionalist.
Here, Ekket did not address the issue that was raised in Okon had raised in
his argument rather he only distracts his attention.
g. Fallacy of Accident
This fallacy is committed when a claim is based on a rule that is generally
valid, but the arguer fails to see the case at hand as an exception. It is
common among legalist, moralist, educationists, and other social theorists
who always infer answer to specific human issues from some absolute moral,
legal, educational and other social rules (Ibid.). For example, these set of
people can reason that given that lying is bad, and then one should not tell
lies, even to save life of an innocent being. Or, given that the idea of murder is
bad, it is unhuman to commit abortion, even if it is to save life of the mother or
even when the foetus is to be epileptically defective.
4.0 Conclusion
Fallacies ambiguity and relevance are things worthy of note in our daily
activities.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/YZzSLJ1_qtM
Audio
108
6.0 References/Further Reading
Fadahunsi, A. and Adegboyega, O.O, 2010. (eds.) Introduction to Philosophy
and Critical thinking, Olabisi Onabanjo University, Ago-Iwoye: Directorate of
General Studies
Flew, Anthony. 1979. A Dictionary of Philosophy. Rev. 2 edition. New York: St
Martins Press.
Stephen C. 2000. The Power of Logic. 2 editions. New York: McGraw – Hill.
Neneye, E. P. 2003. Introduction to Logic and Philosophy. Owerri: Prosperity
Publishers.
Oke, M. and Amodu, A. 2006. Argument and Evidence: An Introduction to
critical thinking, Ibadan: Hope Publications
Ogundowole, E.K. (ed.). 2000. Philosophy and Logic: A Student Companion,
Yaba: Dmodus Publisher.
Uduma, O. Uduma (2015). Logic and Critical Thinking, (2nd Edition) Ghana:
Africa Analytical Publications.
Otakpor, N. 2000 A Preface to Logic. Benin City: Omone Books.
109
Unit 2 Fallacies (Part Two)
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 fallacies of Presumption
3.2 fallacies of Weak Induction
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Reference/further reading
1.0 Introduction
As already stated, although studies units are autonomous, they are
interconnected as well. This study unit is the continuation of the preceding
one. But here, we will particularly be discussing the fallacies involving weak
induction and fallacies of presumption.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to evaluate fallacies of presumption
and weak induction.
3.0 Main Content
3.1. Fallacies of Presumption
This fallacy is committed, when there is the assumption in the argument’s
premises, of what the arguer is out to prove. We shall discuss three of these
types of fallacies and these includes the fallacy of complex or loaded
question, fallacy of leading question and begging the question (Petito-
principii).
3.1.1. Fallacy of Complex or loaded Question
This fallacy of complex question is committed when two or more questions are
asked together at once and as an answer to one question allows one to draw
a conclusion regarding the other question. Example of such fallacy: “Have you
stopped beating your wife?” here the questioner thus assumes the person
addressed has a wife, and beats his wife. Hence, it is a complex question to
answer.
3.1.2 Fallacy of Leading Question
This occurs when an arguer attempts to base his claim on a ‘prepared’
answer, such as a witness under cross examination. For example, “You don’t
know any of the accused person; do you? No, I don’t. This fallacy is
110
commonly used by Lawyers and any other investigative officers to extract
information from suspects and criminals.
3.1.3. Fallacy of Begging the question (Petito-pricipii)
Petito-pricipiiis a Latin word which means Begging the principle. The fallacy of
Begging the question is any form of argument whose conclusion is nothing
more than a restatement of one of the premises. This form of fallacy is
otherwise called Circular reasoning. Example “God exist because the Bible
tells us so, we know that whatever the Bible tells us must be true because it is
the revealed words of God
3.2 Fallacies of Weak Induction
These fallacies are committed, when in an argument, the premises offer some
but not enough evidence for the conclusion. Some of these fallacies are
discussed below.
3.2.1 Fallacy of Appeal to Authority (Argumentum ad Veracudiam)
This is a fallacy based on accepting uncritically the judgment of an expert
merely because he is an authority without mindful of the evident contained in
the premises of the argument which ought to indicate the conclusion. For
example: “Rev. Father Kuka has claimed that marriage must be between a
man and a woman. Therefore, gay marriage should not be legalized.”
3.2.2 Fallacy of Appeal to Ignorance (Argumentum ad Ignoratiam) The
appeal to ignorance means that the conclusion of an argument is proven
simply because nobody has proved the opposite. Here is a typical example:
“After centuries trying, no one has been able to prove that reincarnation
occurs. So, at this point, I think we can safely conclude that reincarnation
does not occur.” You can see that this fallacy has its own limits. That it has
not been proven may be erroneous. This logic cannot hold in scientific matters
mostly based on hypothesis and “wait and see” attitude.
3.2.3 Fallacy of False Cause
There are many forms of false cause fallacy (Uduma: 2015). But the most
common form is called in Latin post hoc, ergopropter hoc, which means “after
this, therefore because of this”. Generally, a false cause fallacy occurs when
the arguer illegitimately assumes a possible cause of a phenomenon to be the
only cause although reasons are lacking for excluding other possible causes.
Here is an example: “Since I came into office 2 years ago, the rate of violent
crime has decreased significantly. So, the longer prison sentences we
recommended are working. “(Layman, 2000: 151). There is false cause
because the longer prison sentences may be a causal factor, but the simple
fact that the longer sentences preceded the decrease in violent crime does
not prove this. There is no doubt that other causal factors need to be
considered.
111
3.2.4 Slippery Slope
A Slippery Slope argument, of course fallacious, has a unique structure as
follows:
There is a slope- a chain of causes. It is slippery. Therefore, if you take even
one step on the slope, you will slide and fall all the way to the bottom. Since
the bottom is a bad place to be, you should not take the first step. Slippery
slope fallacy occurs when in argument, it is concluded that an event should be
prevented from happening due to the belief that its occurrence will bring the
occurrence of certain other events we do not want or wish to have them
happen.
Example: “If there is labour strike, schools will not run, pupils will stay at
home, market will be closed, the economy will be affected. So, strike should
not be allowed, or labour strike should be prevented or avoided” (Fadahunsi
and Adegboyega, 2010: 88).
The major problem with arguing this way is that unwanted events may not
follow from the event that the claim advocates should be prevented.
3.2.5 Fallacy of Hasty Generalization
This fallacy is an argument which applies not only to the premise cases, but
also to cases that are different in kind from those referred to in the premises.
For example: someone who has observed the performance of most logic
students at interviews and then concludes that the understanding of logic
enhances human skill at answering questions, thus, its study must be
enforced in schools.
3.2.6 Gamblers’ Fallacy
This fallacy is committed when one argues that given the sequential or the
frequent occurrences of an event in series, the probability of its (the event) re-
occurrence will increase. For instance: “Socrates played Ludo game 10times
and he lost, therefore, the probability that he will lose the 11th game has
decreased.”
You need to know that the winning or losing of the game at the 11th time
should be seen on 50-50 basis. The game can end in either ways for Socrates
irrespective of the previous sequential frequent occurrences.
3.2.7 False dilemma
In logic, the fallacy of false dilemma simply means that you use a premise that
unjustifiably reduces the number of alternatives to be considered. In other
words, there is a fallacy of false dilemma when the arguer assumes without
justification, a limited number of possible alternatives when there is more than
that.
112
Here is a typical case:
“I’m tired of all these young people criticizing their own country. What I say is
this, Nigeria, love it or leave it! And since these people obviously do not want
to leave the country, they should love it instead of criticizing it”.
There is a fallacy of false dilemma here because the argument presupposes
that there are only two options: either you love Nigeria (uncritically) or you
emigrate. However, you should know that there are other possibilities or
alternatives. You should also know that an argument cannot be called false
dilemma unless you are able to specify at least one alternative that has been
ignored. You should also remember that it is not every false cause fallacy that
involves the unwarranted assumption that if X precedes Y, then X causes Y.
4.0 Conclusion
This study unit dealt with fallacies of ambiguity and unwarranted assumptions.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/6FCb145LR30
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Ade-Ali, S. 2003. Logic Made Easy. Ijebu-Ode: Vicco Publishing House
Fadahunsi, A. and Adegboyega O.O. 2010. (eds) Introduction to Philosophy
and Critical Thinking, Ago-Iwoye: Directorate of General Studies, Olabisi
Onabanjo University, Ago-Iwoye.
Neneye, E. P.2003 Introduction to Logic and Philosophy. Owerri: Prosperity
Publishers.
Otakpor, N. 2000. A Preface to Logic. Benin City: Omone Books, 2000.
Stephen, C. 2000. The Power of Logic. 2 edition. New York: McGraw-Hill,
2000.
Uduma, O. Uduma (2015.) Logic and Critical Thinking, (2nd Edition) Ghana:
Africa Analytical Publications.
113
Unit 3 Definitions (Part One)
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Types of Definitions
3.2 Lexical Definitions
3.3 Theoretical Definitions
3.4 Intentional and Extensional Definitions
3.5 Denotative and Connotative Definitions
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
A definition is a sine qua non tool for effective communication. We cannot
avoid vagueness, ambiguity or equivocation unless we rightly define our
words or terms. It is the major means through which we understand the
meaning of words. It is different from explanation, verbal definition, translation
or mere interpretation. It is true that definition contains all of them, but they
are not identical. Definition is different from them in the sense that it is sharp,
short, delimited and consisting of the word to be defined, that is, the
definiendum (which may be a single word) and the expression which defines
the expression that is, the definitions (which must contain more than one
word) (Stebbing:1993).Although, there are many types of definitions, this
section introduces you to the major types of definition that are most helpful in
clarifying and sharpening arguments.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to apply basic philosophical definitions
- Lexical, theoretical, intentional, extensional, denotative and connotative in
solving philosophical challenges
3.0 Main Content
You need to know from the outset here what definition is. Definition of a thing
has been described as statement of essence of a thing. This description was
given by the classical thought and it has its origin in Aristotle’s assertion that
an object’s essential attribute forms its “essential nature”. Thus, in defining
such object its essential attributes must be included. You need to know here
that the classical idea of definition has led to philosophers’ distinction between
‘nominal’ and ‘real essence’. That is, while the name ‘home’ (nominal) is
meaningful and we may know it, however, we may not know the essential
nature (real essence) of home. Thus, the meaning of a name is distinct from
the nature a thing may have in order that the name apply to it.
114
As distinction can be drawn between nominal and real essence, philosopher
over the years have also make distinctions between nominal and real
definition. A ‘nominal definition’ one that explain what a word means. That is,
it says what the nominal essence is (see the above example). ‘Real definition’
on the other hand expresses the real nature of a thing.
Let us ask ourselves a question here, why do we engage ourselves with
drawing this distinction here especially the about the notion of essence in
definition? The reason for this is that there are certain intrinsic elements about
that which is to be defined (definiendum) which, that which is doing the
defining (definiens) must capture without which the definiens will not have
same meaning with the definiendum, which may lead to ambiguity and
vagueness (Uduma: 2015).
As stated earlier, although, there are many types of definition, this section is
to introduce you to the major types of definition that are most helpful in
clarifying and sharpening arguments.
3.1 Major types of definitions
In most introductory logic textbooks, we can identify at least seven (07) major
types of definitions. This section will focus only on the lexical, theoretical,
intentional and extensional definitions and Denotative and Connotative.
3.2 Lexical definition
A lexical definition is identical with a dictionary definition. It is the conventional
or established meaning of a term. It is a definition that is usually expected
from request for definition. Such definition is usually stated as simply as
possible in other to convey information to the widest audience. This form of
definition also reports a meaning the definiendum already has: it does not give
the definiendum a new meaning. In short, a lexical definition is descriptive,
reporting actual usage of the term, within speaker’s usage of the term, rather
than prescriptive, which would be to stick within a version regarded as
“correct” regardless of drift in accepted meaning.
We need to state here that since lexical definitions report actual usage of
terms, lexical definitions may be either true or false (Uduma:2015). If the
definition (the definiens) conforms to (that is give true report) how a language
community uses the definiendum this definition will be true, but it will be false
if the definiens does not conform to (that is gives false report) the meaning a
particular community attaches to the definiendum. For instance, the definition
of “garage” as a building where cars are packed is true because it reports
(conforms to) how the English-speaking people use it. But the definition of
“garage” as a place of worship is false because it does not agree to its usage
in the English language.
You should not that while this kind of definitions may be false or true, it still
does not have anything to do with the question of whether the definiendum
names any “real” or “existent” thing. Therefore, the definitions of all words with
115
long established usage like unicorn, as “animal like a white horse with a long
straight horn growing on its head” is a lexical definition, and it is true, because
of the definiendum (unicorn) is meant by the way the definiens uses it.
3.3Theoretical definition
This kind of definition has been described as a special brand of stipulative and
précising definitions. It is distinguished from the two by the attempt of the two
establish the use of this term within the context of a broader intellectual
framework. This form of definition expresses the meaning of a word based on
available theories in specific discipline.
Theoretical definitions is directed at developing coherent theoretical account
of the subject at hand. The definition does not attempt overcoming ambiguity
or to achieve precision rather it focuses on formulating a theory within which a
fully correct definition of important terms could be stated.
This form of definitions is found in disciplines that do formulate theory and
such theories requires precise definition and results of such theories are
always accepted as correct. Scientific disciplines a good example of this
definition. In this kind of discipline, the definition of term is not likely to
contradict another definition based on another theory as we may have in other
non-scientific disciplines like Arts and Social Sciences.
3.4 Intentional and Extensional definitions
You cannot attain clarity about meaning unless you succeed in distinguishing
between intentional and extensional definitions. According to Copi, (1978) an
intentional definition is “the collection of properties shared by all and only
those objects in a term’s extension”. For instance, the intentional definition of
a term like Zebra refers us to a certain four-footed animal that has white and
black stripes throughout the body. This is the intentional definition of Zebra
because Zebra as a species falls under this characterization. So only Zebras
as a species have the distinctiveness and universality of the definition as it
applies to them. In other words, the extension of a term consists of the set of
things to which the term applies while the intension of a term consists of the
properties a thing must have to be included in the term’s extension. And,
according to Salmon Wesley, since you can specify the meaning of a word
through its extension or its intension, the distinction between extensional and
intentional definitions becomes very necessary in language (1984). There are
two types of extensional definitions: nonverbal (or ostensive) and verbal.
Ostensive definition occurs when you attempt to specify the meaning of a
term by pointing to objects in its extension. For instance, if you want to teach
someone the meaning of the word “car”, you simply need to point to a car and
utter the word “car”. Keep in mind also that this definition does not go without
some problems. For instance, there are cars with different shapes, sizes and
makes. In verbal definition we rely on signification, that is, we use verbal
definition to specify the meaning of a term. Here is an example of an
enumerative verbal extensive definition: “Philosopher” means someone such
as Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Kant, or Hegel (Layman: 2000).
116
Let us first state in clear term that intentional definitions are applicable to
things that have clearly-defined set of properties. It can also be applied to sets
that are too large to list in extensional definition. Thus, as opposite of
extensional definition, the intentional definition of a term states the necessary
and enough conditions for a thing being a member of a set, that is, the set of
features which are shared by everything to which it applies. For example, an
intentional definition of “spinster” is “un married woman” being an unmarried
woman is an essential property of something referred to as a spinster. So, we
can say that it is a necessary condition as one cannot be a spinster without
being an unmarried woman. It also remains enough condition that any
unmarried woman is a spinster.
From our discussion of both intentional and extensional meanings, we can
say that they are closely connected to each other or that they are interrelated.
Most times we sometimes feel that the intension of a concept or term
determines its extension that we decide whenever we encounter any new
furniture whether it belongs among the chairs by seeing whether it has the
relevant features. Thus, as the intension of a general term increases, by
specifying with greater details those features that a thing must have for it to
apply, the term’s extension tends to decrease since fewer items now qualify.
3.5 Denotative and Connotative Definition
These two kinds of definition suggest the possibility of the definition of a
general term which can be done in two ways. A denotative definition attempt
to identify the extension of the term in question. In which case we could
provide a denotative definition of the phrase “this okada riders” simply by
listing all the names of those who constitutes the “okada riders”. Of course, a
complete listing of the things to which the general term applies may be
cumbersome in many cases, but this can be achieved by listing smaller group
of individuals or simply by stating few examples. Although, there may be
some cases where this may not be possible this is where the connotative
definition become useful.
A connotative definition tries to identify the intention of a term by providing a
synonymous linguistic expression or an operational procedure for determining
the applicability of the term. It should be noted that it may not always be easy
to come up with an alternative word or phrase that has the same meaning or
to specify a concrete test for applicability. But when this work, connotative
definition provides an adequate means for securing the meaning of a term.
4.0 Conclusion
Philosophical definitions are useful in solving challenges.
117
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/0ejaDiKyx4o
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
The American Concise Dictionary.1997
Copi, I.M. 1974. Introduction to Logic. New York: Macmillan.
Gorsky, D.P. 1974. Definitions. Moscow: Progress Publishers.
Kahane, H. 1973. Logic and Philosophy-A Modern Introduction. 2nd edition.
California: Wadsworth.
Plato. Five Dialogues. 1981. (Trans.) G.M.A.. Grube. Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett.
Stebbing, L.S. 1993. A Modern Introduction to Logic. London: Methuen, 1993.
Wesley, Salmon. 1984. Logic, 3rd edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Uduma, O. Uduma. (2015) Logic and Critical Thinking, (2nd Edition) Ghana:
Africa Analytical Publications.
118
Unit 4 Definitions (Part Two)
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Stipulative Definition
3.2 Recursive Definition
3.3 Persuasive Definition
3.4 Precising Definition
3.5 Definition by Genus and Difference
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit is the continuation of the preceding one. It introduces you to
three major types of definitions.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to solve daily challenges in
communication using stipulative, recursive, persuasive, precising, genus and
difference definitions.
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Stipulative Definition
As a writer or speaker, you are free either to introduce a new word into
language or to give a word a new meaning. Once you do that, you are
stipulating. A stipulative definition therefore is one that a term whether new or
existing is given a new meaning for the purpose of argument or discussion in
a given context (Uduma: 2015). A major feature of this definition is that it
freely assigns meaning to a completely new term creating a usage that had
never be in existence. It specifies or stipulates the meaning of a word or
phrase. The goal of this definition is to propose the adoption of shared use of
a novel term, that has no existing standard it can be compared with and the
definition stands correct always except it turns out to be useless or inapt. For
instance, it is on record that until the year 2000, the word “double-dodge” had
no generally accepted meaning. “Double–dodge” means the anticipatory
movements people commonly make when they nearly collide with some
person (as when walking toward each other in a confined space) and are
trying to avoid such collision” (Layman, 2000: 98) For instance: “Rebecca and
Eduardo nearly ran into each other in the hallway; but at the last moment they
double – dodged and then came to a full stop, whereupon Rebecca burst into
119
laughter. Thus, even though the “double – dodge” is stipulated here, we still
understand the full meaning of the above expression.
Always keep in mind that any stipulative definition is a recommendation or
proposal to use a term in a certain manner. And, the meaning or definition that
may be given to a new or currently existing term may, but not necessarily,
contradict the lexical definition of the term. That is why as a recommendation
or proposal, a stipulative definition is neither true nor false, accurate or
inaccurate, correct or incorrect. This is responsible for the differences
between this form of definition and lexical definition. A stipulative definition is
a form of proposal or resolution to use the term to mean whatever it is used
for. In those regard, a stipulative definition is directive and not informative.
3.2 Recursive Definitions
This definition is sometimes referred to as Inductive definition. It is a form of
definition that defines a word in terms of itself, although in a useful way.
Recursive definition consists of three steps:
1. At least one thing is stated to be a member of the set being defined,
this is sometimes called a “base set”
2. All things bearing a certain relation to other members of the set are
also to count as members of the set. It is this step that makes the
definition recursive.
3. All other things are excluded from the set
For example, a natural number can be defined as follows (after Piano);
1. “0” is a natural number.
2. Each natural number has a distinct successor, such that: the successor
of a natural number is also a natural number, and no natural number is
succeeded by “0”
3. Nothing else is a number
Here “0” will have exactly one successor, which for convenience we call “1”, in
turn, “1” will have exactly one successor, which we would call “2”, and so on.
You will notice that the second condition in the definition itself refers to natural
numbers and hence involves self-reference. Although, this kind of definition
involves a form of circularity, it is vicious, and definitions is quite successful.
3.2 Persuasive Definition
Whenever a definition attempt to attach emotive meaning to the use of term
and thereby confuse the literal meaning of the term, such definition is said to
be persuasive. In other words, a persuasive definition is one that has its term
defined in such a way as to be an argument for a position. It is deceptive in
that it has the surface of a dictionary definition. This is what make persuasive
definition to be different from lexical definition. Lexical definition aims to be
neutral to all usages. Persuasive definitions are usually formulated to
influence the attitude, excite or stir the emotion of its hearers or readers. It is
120
on this ground that a persuasive definition is always rejected as it is often
considering to be fallacious.
This form of definitions is common in politics, sex and religion. An example of
this definition is found in Ambrose Bierce in The Devils Dictionary when he
defines “heathen” as a “benighted creature who has the folly to worship
something that can see and feel”. According to Uduma, a lexical definition of
would be couched as “one who does not believe in the Christian God” or “one
who does not follow an established religion”. What Bierce was defining was
an attempt to present as foolish those who believe in what cannot be seen or
feel in other that he might make a case for the heathens.
3.3 Precising Definition
Précising definition is a form of definition that is used in contexts where the
vagueness of a word, term proposition is unacceptable. It is developed to take
care of the ambiguity or vagueness that some other forms of definitions,
particularly stipulative and lexical definitions may give up on. This definition
extends the lexical of a term for specific purpose by including additional
criteria that narrow down the set of things, meeting the definition. This sort of
definition begins with the lexical definition of a term but then propose to
sharpen it by stipulating more narrow limits on its use. In this regard, précising
definition combine two techniques to arrive at its form of definition. That is the
techniques of the lexical and stipulative definitions. This is done to reduce
vagueness of a word or phrase. To this effect, persuasive definition is seen as
a form of stipulative definition which attempt to describe the “true” or
“commonly accepted” meaning of a term, while stipulating an alter use,
perhaps as an argument for some specific views (see C.L Stevenson as
quoted by Uduma: 2015). But then, the lexical part must be correct and the
stipulative portion should appropriately reduce the vagueness.
We need not to confuse the pecising definitions combining the lexical and
stipulative techniques for its use to mean that it is the same with the latter two.
Précising definition differs from both lexical and stipulative definitions. One
point of difference is that while stipulative definition freely assigns new
meaning to a completely new or currently existing term creating a usage that
have never previously existed, that which is to be defined (definiendum) of
précising definition is not a new term but one whose usage is established,
although vague. Précising definition does not in any way freely assign any
meaning to its definiendum, they must remain true to established usage.
However, précising definition must go beyond established usage if the
vagueness of the definiendum is to be reduced. For example, a dictionary
may define the term “student” as “anyone attending an educational institution
of any type or someone who studies something”. However, a travelling
agency or movie theatre may propose a précising definition for the word
“student” of “any person under the age of 18 enrolled in a local school” for
them to determine who is eligible to receive rebate or discounted tickets”.
121
3.3 Definition by Genus and Difference
The method of definition by genus and difference is very important in
language and logic. Indeed, it is known as one of the best ways to reduce
ambiguity and vagueness. The definition by genus and difference also
encompasses some other methods of definition such as: stipulative, précising
or real, theoretical and lexical definitions. It is a kind of definition in which a
word or concept that indicate a specific type of item is described first by a
category, genus, then distinguished from other items in that category by
differential. The differentiae of a species are the species’ properties that other
members of the genus do not have. In short, the genus is the broad category,
the species is a type within that category, and the differentiae are the
distinguishing characteristics of the specie. The words Definiendum and
definiens are two key words you must master before you can understand the
method of definition by genus and difference. The definiendum stands for the
word being defined while the definiens is the word or words that do the
defining.
You also need some clarifications concerning proper sub-class, genus,
species and difference. For a class X to be a proper sub-class of another
class Y, every member of class X must be a member of class Y. For example,
the class of collies is a proper sub class of dogs. For the above explanation, it
is clear that the species is simply a proper sub class of the genus ‘dog.’ You
should also note that the way these terms are used here is different from the
use they are given in biology. In logic, the difference is the attribute that
distinguishes the members of a given species from the members of other
species in the same genus (Layman, 2000:101).The process of constructing a
definition by genus and difference is as follows:
1. Choose a term that is more general than the term to be defined and
name its genus.
2. Find a word or phrase that identifies the attribute that distinguishes
the species in question from other species in the same genus. In
constructing this kind of definition, we begin by identifying a
familiar, broad category or kind (the genus) to which everything our
term signifies (along with things of other sorts) belongs; then we
specify the distinctive features (the differentiae) that set them apart
from all other things of this kind. For instance, if we are to define
the phrase human being following the ancient Greek view point; we
shall say that human beings are members of a species. So, we ask
what the genus, or general category, of species is; we would say
that the genus is animal. The genus, then, is animal and the
species is human being. What is the differentia of the species, that
is, the distinguish characteristics, that is properties that human
beings have, that other animals do not have? From the ancient
Greek view, it is rationality; the things that humans have that other
animals do not have is rationality. So, rationality is the differentia of
the human species according to the ancient Greeks; thus Aristotle
said, “Man is the rational animal”. By this he meant to be giving a
122
definition of “man” or “human being”. The point we should note is
that thus definition is used to categorise different plants, animals
and other things into biological categories. But then, its use is not
restricted to science. The idea behind this definition is the natural
thing to do if we are to explain the meaning of a word to someone.
According to Uduma O Uduma (2015), there are at least six (6) criteria we
need for this method of definition by genus and difference to be adequate.
Criterion 1: Avoid Circularity: A circular definition uses the term being as
part of its own definition, it cannot provide any useful information. When this
rule broken, the situation will be of two folds. It is either audience already
understood the meaning of the term or it cannot understand the explanation
that includes that term, which eventually defeat the purpose of the
explanation. For instance, if the term “bachelor” is defined as “an unmarried
man” or “Metaphysics” is defined as “systematic study of metaphysical
issues”. Such definition offers no information.
Criterion 2: Focus on Essential Features: A good definition must state
enough essential characteristics so that through them the term tries to point
out the features that are essential to the designation of things as members of
the relevant group. In other words, a definition must not mention trivial
characteristics.
.
Criterion 3: Capture the correct Extension: the definition must apply to the
same thing as the term being defined. It must neither be too broad nor too
narrow. For instance, when a “bird” is defined as “warm blooded animal”. This
definition is too broad as it has included all the other animals that are not
birds.
Or, when it is defined as” feathered egg-laying animal”. This is also too narrow
as the male birds have been excluded.
When it is defined as “small flying animal”, this is too broad and too narrow. It
is too broad because it has included “bat” which is not a bird and too narrow
because it has excluded “Ostriches”
Criterion 4: Definitions should avoid figurative or obscure language: A
definition is meant to explain the meaning of a term to someone who is not
familiar with its proper application. Thus, language that does not help such a
person learn how to apply the term should be avoided. Otherwise, the
purpose of the definition is defeated
Criterion 5: Definitions should be affirmative rather than negative: definition
is not expected to be negative where it can be positive. It is what a term is not,
when of course what is meant to achieve is to make what the term is known to
the audience
.
Criterion 6: Avoid definition by example: Since examples are by themselves
not enough to define a term, it should be avoided. The only time this may not
123
matter could be when the audience already have some larger or context of the
term.
4.0 Conclusion
We have some other forms of definitions in this unit. However, it is important
to note their limitations to definition in language. This is because, English
language contain finite number of words. Thus, any comprehensive list of
definitions must either be circular or leave some terms undefined. Especially if
every term of every definien must be defined, this process will have to
continue ad infinitum. As a matter of fact, there are some terms that cannot be
defined, e.g. “generalisma”, “unity”, and so on. This is because we cannot
assign any higher genus under which they may fall.
However, to avoid this, some philosophers have argued for us to leave some
terms undefined. For instance, Wittgenstein rejected he very idea that every
explanation of the meaning of a term needed itself to be explained. To him,
there is no need to support an explanation with another explanation. John
Locke on the other hand simply conclude that we cannot define individuals.
This is because names are learned by connecting an idea with sound, so that
speaker and hearer have the same idea when the word is used. This to him is
not possible when no one else is acquainted with the particular things that has
fallen under our notice. All these positions point to the limitations that are
inherent in definitions
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/3DG1M2rix_Y
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
The American Heritage Concise Dictionary. 1997.
Copi, I.M. 1978. Introduction to Logic. New York: Macmillan.
Gorsky, D.P. 1974 Definitions. Moscow: Progress Publishers,
Howard. 1973. Logic and Philosophy-A Modern Introduction. 2nd ed.)
California: Wadsworth Publishing.
Plato. Five Dialogues. (Trans.) G.M.A. Grube. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1981.
Stebbing,
124
L.S. A Modern Introduction to Logic. London: Methuen, 1993.
Salmon. 1984 Logic. (3rd ed.) Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984. 86
Uduma, O. Uduma (2015). Logic and Critical Thinking, (2nd Edition) Ghana:
Africa Analytical Publications.
125
Unit 5 Categorical Propositions Contents
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 The universal affirmative proposition
3.2 The universal negative preposition
3.3 The particular affirmative preposition
3.4 The particular negative proposition
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit introduces you to different types of categorical propositions. It
will focus specifically on what logicians call categorical propositions such as
universal affirmative and negative, particular affirmative and negative. As
stated earlier (module 2, unit 2) in logic proper statements and proposition are
synonymous and therefore interchangeable. So to a logician, a proposition is
that statement that can both be denied or asserted. These propositions are of
four (04) types and form two pairs, each pair having two propositions with it.
The two pairs derive their names from the Latin words Affirmo and Negowhich
stand for affirmative and negative, respectively. Under Affirmowe have
universal affirmative and particular affirmative while in Negowe have Universal
Negative and Particular Negative.
In its standard form, a categorical proposition is as follows: quantity/subject,
class/quality, copula/predicate class. The quality also understood as the
number of members of the subject class is usually indicated by quantifiers
such as All and Some. While the quality is the affirmation or negation of the
verb/copula is, which (1)is taken as a symbol not of identity but of inclusion.
There is also a short hand way of expressing the categorical positions
individually. A is for universal affirmative: All S is PE. is for Universal
Negative: No S is PI is for particular affirmative: Some S is P O is for
particular Negative: Some S is not P.(1)
This study unit on the “types of propositions” has been taken with little
modification from N. Otakpor, A Preface to Logic (2000).
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to solve philosophical issues using
categorical propositions.
126
3.0 Main Content
3.1 the Universal Affirmative Proposition (All S Is P)
The universal affirmative proposition contains two major distinct
characteristics. First, as a proposition, it always makes a universal statement,
that is, a statement which embraces all the persons, objects or concepts
belonging to any particular class. Secondly, a universal affirmative proposition
always makes positive statement or affirms something about the universal
class. For instance, a statement such as, “All Humans beings” falls under the
category of a universal proposition. You can see that in the statement “All
Human Beings” includes everyone: men, women, boys and girls of all ages. It
also includes all the races. In fact, the statement “All Human Beings” simply
refers to all those who have human attribute. Besides, if you go on to say. “All
Human Beings are Mammals,” then you will be making a universal affirmative
proposition. You will be saying something positive or affirming something
about all human beings, that is, that they are mammals. Your statement is
categorical because you have not expressed any doubt about whether they
are mammals (Otakpor, 2000: 58).
You should also keep in mind that the use of the adjective “All” to stress the
universal character of this proposition is not always necessary. It is
conventionally understood that some propositions without the adjective “All”
can be universal. For instance, the statement. “Beings are mamals"” clearly
implies that all human beings are mammals. The adjective “All” is also called
a “Quantifier”. Here are some examples of Universal Affirmative prepositions:
(a) Bride prices should be abolished (b) Men should contend themselves with
one wife. (c)All politicians are liars. (d) All private schools are profit –making.
e) All educated Nigerian girls are proud. (f) All taxi drivers have clear vision.
(g) All policemen take bribes. (h) All economists are stingy. (i) All these
propositions are from Otakpor, 2000, P59.
If you look carefully at the above propositions, you will discover that most
universal propositions are not often true. They may be persuasive because
they are widely believed.
These examples also expose you to the danger of making broad assertions or
claims.
3.2 The Universal Negative Proposition (No S is P)
The universal affirmative and universal Negative propositions share the same
characteristics. The only difference lies in the fact that one affirms while the
other denies. That is, the universal affirmative proposition makes affirmative
statements while the universal Negative makes negative statements. For
example, if the universal affirmative proposition says, “All Human beings are
mammals”, the universal Negative proposition will say “No human beings are
mammals”. However, they make an all- embracing and sweeping general
statements which may sound plausible, but which may be false (Otakpor,
127
2000:64). Other examples are; Bride prices should not be abolished (b) Men
should not contend themselves with one wife. As stated earlier, universal
propositions mostly depend on public bias or prejudice either for or against
something, persons, a class or objects. For this reason, it is not often true.
3.3 The particular Affirmative proposition (S is P)
As already stated, we have two pairs of categorical propositions: Affirmative
and Negative. Under the pair of Affirmative we have the Universal Affirmative
and the particular Affirmative proposition. The difference between the two lies
in the fact that the particular Affirmative proposition makes a statement about
some but not all of the members of any class of objects or persons. For
instance, if you make a statement such as “some students are lazy” you are
simply making a particular affirmative preposition. You are making a positive
statement about some members of the class of students, that is, that “some
students are lazy”, not that all students are lazy.
3.4 The Particular Negative Proposition (Some S is not P)
It is the opposite of a particular Affirmative proposition. Although it belongs to
the pair of Negative affirmative proposition it still remains different from the
universal negative. The particular negative proposition denies something
about some members of a class. For instance, if you say that some taxi
drivers are not drunk. You are making a particular negative proposition; you
are simply denying the attribute of being drunk to some, but not all taxi-
drivers.
4.0 Conclusion
This study unit dealt with the different types of propositions. It dealt
specifically with what logicians call categorical propositions.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/f7yLGIGPLEY
Audio
128
6.0 References /Further Reading
Chinenye, E. and Ochulor, L. 2002. Introduction to Logic. Calabar: Darl-Bassy
Press.
Stephen. C. 2000. The Power of Logic. (2nd edition) , New York: McGraw-Hill.
Otakpor, 2000. A Preface to Logic. Benin City: Omone Books.
Discussion Forum
1. Match the definition on the left to the letter of the item on the right that best
characterizes it.
i. “Tall man” means male human over 6 feet in height. A. Enumerative definition
ii. “Tome” means large book B. Definition of sub class
iii. A “sound argument” is one that C. Lexical definition
iv. Has only true premises D. Stipulative definition
v. Is valid (i.e., its conclusion cannot E. Précising definition be
false while its premises are true)
vi. “Humans” means rational F. Theoretical definition
2. Identify one defect in each of the following definitions, using the six criteria for
definition by genus and difference.
i. “Penguin” means bird that can’t fly, but not an Ostrich, Cassowary, or Emu.
ii. An “Octagon” is a figure shaped like a stop sign.
iii. A “triangle” is a closed – plane figure having three sides of equal length.
iv. An “ellipse” is a cross between a circle and a rectangle.
v. “Homosexual” means a man who is erotically attracted exclusively (or at least
primarily) to other men.
vi. A “wealthy person” is one who has as much money as Bill Gates or Aliko
Dangote.
vii. “Evil” is defined as the darkness that lies within the human soul.
viii. “Blue” means having a bluish colour.
ix. Time is the great container into which we pour our lives.
x. “Oligarchy” means a form of government in which the ruling power belongs to
a few persons.
Post your answers on the forum page. Among the posts of your colleagues, select
two and comment on the posts.
129
Module 5 Argument Forms and Law of Thought
Unit 1 Argument Forms
Unit 2 Laws of Thought
Unit 1 Argument Forms
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Arguments forms
3.2 Law of Thought
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit introduces you to the various forms of arguments in philosophy
and logic
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to analyse arguments forms in solving
communication issues.
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Argument forms
Having defined and discussed what statement and statement forms are all
about, you should always remember that an argument form is to arguments
what statement form is to statements. Logicians define an argument form as
‘any sequence of symbols containing statement variables but no statements;
such that when statements are substituted for the same statement variable
throughout the result is an argument. There is at least one fundamental
difference between statement form and argument form. In the statement form
and its substitution instances while in that of argument form reference is made
to argument form and its substitution instances.
130
3.1.1 Modus Ponens
This is the simplest type of valid argument form that is constructed with
hypothetical conditional statements. The argument form of Modus Ponens can
be read as follows:
If this happens, then that will follow
This happens
Therefore, that follows.
In a symbolic form the argument form of Modus Ponens become thus:
p ᴐ q
P
Therefore q
Of course, ‘p’ here represents the antecedent while ‘q’ represents the Modus
Ponens argument form corresponds to the first rule of inference earlier stated.
You should also keep in mind that Modus Ponens is any argument that affirms
the antecedent of the first premise in the second premise and affirms the
consequent of the first premise in its conclusion. For instance, when we say:
If all men are mortal, then Bola is mortal
All men are mortal
Therefore, Bola is mortal
The form of this argument is as follows:
P ᴐ q
P
Therefore. q
However, you should bear in mind that any argument form that denies the
antecedent is invalid and therefore commits the fallacy of Denying the
Antecedent.
3.1.2 Modus Tollens
p ᴐ q
-q
-P
From the above you can see that the characteristics of Modus Tollens
argument form is that it always denies the consequent. So, you should always
remember that any argument that denies the consequent of the first premise,
in the second premise, in its conclusion, is of the Modus Tollens form. For
instance, when we say:
If all men mortal, then Bola is mortal
Bola is not mortal
Therefore, All Men are not mortal
The form of this argument is as follows:
131
P ᴐ q
-q
Therefore –p
3.1.3 Hypothetical Syllogism
p ᴐ q
q ᴐ r
Therefore, p ᴐ r
What makes Hypothetical Syllogism unique is that the first premise and
conclusion have the same antecedent, the second premise and conclusion
have the same consequent and the consequent of the first premise is the
same as the antecedent of the second premise. So, any hypothetical
syllogism that follows the above character is a valid one. For instance, when
we say:
If Bola is a father then he has children
If he has children then he has a wife
Therefore, if Bola is a father then he has a wife
The form of this argument is as follows:
p ᴐ q
q ᴐ r
Therefore p ᴐ r
3.1.4 Disjunctive Syllogism
P v q
- p
Therefore q
As the name says, disjunctive syllogism is that form of argument that has a
disjunction as first premise. It is unique in the sense that although the second
premise always denies or contradicts one of the two disjuncts of the first
premise, it goes on to validly infer, in the
conclusion, that the other disjunct is true. Take the following example:
Either Tope will cook or Tope will eat in the restaurant.
Tope will not cook.
Therefore Tope will eat in the restaurant.
The form of this argument is as follows:
P v q
-p
Therefore q
Always remember that in a Disjunctive Syllogism any of the two disjuncts can
be negated. And, if the first disjunct for instance is negated the second
become automatically true and vice versa. This is the principle of any
Disjunctive Syllogism.
132
4.0 Conclusion
This study unit dealt with the rules of inference and Argument forms. It is clear
to younow that logicians acknowledge at least four common forms of
arguments which are, Modus Ponens, Modus Tollens, Hypothetical syllogism
and Disjunctive syllogism
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/oRXvd9OkpKE
Audio
6.0 Reference/Further Reading
Layman, C. 2002. The Power of Logic. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Neneye, E. P. 2003. Introduction to Logic and Philosophy. Owerri: Prosperity
Publishers.
Otakpor, Nkeonye. A Preface to Logic. Benin City: Omone Books, 2000.120
133
Unit 2 Laws of Thought
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Law of Identity
3.2 Law of non – Contradiction
3.3 Law of Excluded Middle
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Reference/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This study unit introduces you to the laws of thought as laid down by Aristotle.
According to the Greek philosopher (Aristotle), these principles or laws can be
classified as follows: law of identity, law of Non-contradiction and law of
excluded middle.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to analyse sentences and statements
using the law of thought.
3.0 Main Content
As stated earlier, Aristotle laid down these three principles or laws of thought
which are our main concern in this unit. These laws are: 1) law of identity 2)
law of Non-contradiction and c) law of excluded middle.
3.1 The law of identity
The law of identity is always stated as follows: “A is A”. Here “A” stands for
anything whatever. The originality of this law is that it simply states that
anything is what it is. For example, “A is A”; “B is B” and “C is C”, everything
you say presupposes that thing. For instance, if you speak of a car you are
presupposing that ‘a car is a car’. You should also keep in mind that the law of
identity “A is A” does not give you specific information concerning the qualities
of A: it only tells you that “A is A” that is, whatever “A” happens to be, the thing
is itself and nothing else. It does not matter what the “A” is made to represent.
The law of identity is always true. Logicians call it a tautological statement
because the statement “A is A” is a necessary truth. Moreover, the statement
“a car is a car” can neverbe false.
3.2 The law of Non-contradiction
134
The law of non-contradiction states that nothing can be both ‘A’ and not ‘A’.
According to the law, if this is ‘A’ then it cannot at the same time be ‘–A’. For
instance, if this is a chalk, it cannot be anything else than a chalk. If this is a
house, it cannot be anything else than a house. It must be one or the other. It
cannot be both. It must either be ‘A’ or not ‘A’. If it happens to be ‘A’ and not
‘A’, then it becomes self–contradictory. The only way to avoid
self–contradiction is to obey the law of non–contradiction.
3.3 The law of Excluded Middle
The law of excluded middle is the third law of thought and it states that
everything is either A or not A. As it indicates, the law of excluded middle
excludes the middle ground between A and not A. According to the law,
everything must choose to be either A or not A. It cannot choose to be neither.
For instance, this is either a car or not a car. It cannot be neither a car nor not
a car. It must be either a house or not a house. It must be one or the other.
According to the law of excluded middle, you cannot refuse to be this and also
refuse to be the other. The overall aim of these laws of thought is to set
patterns for anyone who wants to think and speak correctly. Their main duty is
to ensure consistent and non – self-contradictory thinking, speaking and
writing. For instance, the law of identity tells you that a thing is what it is and
nothing else. The law of non-contradiction tells you that a thing must be one
thing or another thing. It cannot be that very thing and be another thing at the
same time. The law of excluded middle tells you that a thing must be one
thing or not that very thing. It cannot be neither that very thing nor not that
very thing. It must be one or the other. These laws of thought are very
important because they are presupposed in all our speech whenever we
speak about anything.
4.0 Conclusion
This study unit dealt with different laws of thought. There are generally three
standard laws of thought laid down by the Greek philosopher Aristotle (384 –
322 BC) These laws are:
1. The law of identity
2. The law of non – contradiction
3. The law of excluded middle.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy
the link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you
have read in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen.
You can also download them and play offline.
Video https://youtu.be/nS-AyXqbLNY
Audio
135
6.0 References/Further Reading
Neneye, E P. 2003. Introduction to Logic and Philosophy. Owerri: Prosperity
Publishers.
Otakpor, N. 2000. A Preface to Logic. Benin City: Omone Books.
Uduma, O. Uduma (2015). Logic and Critical Thinking, (2nd Edition) Ghana:
Africa Analytical Publications.
Discussion Forum
In your context, identify two issues each that involve argument forms and law
of thought. State the issue and analyse. Post to the forum page.
136
