Course Information
Course Code: GST 204
Course Title: Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Credit Unit: 2
Course Status: Compulsory
Semester: 2nd
Required Study Hour: 4 hours per week
Edition First
Course Team
Course Developer: Prof. May Ifeoma Nwoye Ph.D.
Course Writer: Prof. May Ifeoma Nwoye Ph.D.
Instructional Designer: Inegbedion, Juliet O. (Ph.D.)
Learning Technologists: Dr. Adewale Adesina, Nura Maidoki, & Henry Ude
Content Editor: Prof. Abdul Salam Jibril
Copy Editors: Inegbedion, Juliet O. (Ph.D.) & Christiana Uzoukwu
(Mrs)
Ice Breaker
Upload your passport and introduce yourself by stating your names, what you do
for a living, your hobby, your expectation in this course and the name you would
prefer to be called during this course.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA
© 2018 by NOUN Press
National Open University of Nigeria
Headquarters
University Village
Plot 91, Cadastral Zone
Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway
Jabi, Abuja
Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island, Lagos
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng
URL: www.nou.edu.ng
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any
form or by any means, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Published by:
National Open University of Nigeria
Headquarters, University Village
Plot 91, Cadastral Zone, Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway
Jabi, Abuja, Nigeria
Printed by NOUN Press
np@noun.edu.ng
Printed 2018
ISBN: 978-978-8521-93-8
2
Course Guide
Introduction
Welcome to GST 204: Entrepreneurship and Innovation. GST 204 is a two-
credit unit course that has minimum duration of one semester. It is a compulsory
course for all undergraduate students in the university. This course is an
introductory course for studying Entrepreneurship for the first time. The design
and flow of the course are aimed at creating awareness, providing the knowledge
and skills that are important to achieving success in all human endeavours.
Course Objectives
The objective of this course is to:
1. Provide a hands-on, practical guidance to understand and discover critical
aspects of Entrepreneurship;
2. Develop competencies, know-how, experience, attitudes, resources, and
network required to pursue different Entrepreneurial opportunities;
3. Introduce you to the key requirements for starting an enterprise; and
4. Expose you to many of the vital issues and immerse you in key learning
experiences, such as the theories of Entrepreneurship, the Nigerian
business environment, and the concept and management of innovation.
Working through this Course
To successfully complete this course, read the study units, listen to the audios
and videos, do all assessments, open the links and read, participate in
discussion forums, read the recommended books and other materials provided,
prepare your portfolios, and participate in the online facilitation.
Each study unit has introduction, intended learning outcomes, the main content,
conclusion, summary and references/further readings. The introduction will tell
you the expectations in the study unit. Read and note the intended learning
outcomes (ILOs). The intended learning outcomes tell you what you should be
able to do at the completion of each study unit. So, you can evaluate your
learning at the end of each unit to ensure you have achieved the intended
learning outcomes. To meet the intended learning outcomes, knowledge is
presented in texts, video and links arranged into modules and units. Click on the
links as may be directed but where you are reading the text off line, you will have
to copy and paste the link address into a browser. You can download the audios
and videos to view off line. You can also print or download the texts and save in
your computer or external drive. The conclusion gives you the theme of the
knowledge you are taking away from the unit. Unit summaries are presented in
downloadable audios and videos.
3
There are two main forms of assessments – the formative and the summative.
The formative assessments will help you monitor your learning. This is
presented as in-text questions, discussion forums and Self-Assessment
Exercises.
The summative assessments would be used by the university to evaluate your
academic performance. This will be given as Computer Based Assessment
(CBA) which serves as continuous assessment and final examinations. A
minimum of three computer based test will be given with only one final
examination at the end of the semester. You are required to take all the
computer based tests and the final examination.
Study Units
There are 37 study units in this course divided into nine modules. The modules
and units are presented as follows:
Module 1 Development Entrepreneurship/Intrapreneurship
Unit 1 An Overview of the Definitions of Entrepreneurship and
Intrapreneurship
Unit 2 Concepts and Theories of Entrepreneurship
Unit 3 The Entrepreneurship Culture
Unit 4 Brief Biographical Studies of Prominent Nigerian Entrepreneurs
Unit 5 Barrier to Entrepreneurial Practice
Module 2 The Nigerian Entrepreneurial Environment
Unit 1 The Business External Environment
Unit 2 Identifying Business Opportunities and Threats
Unit 3 Strategies for exploring opportunities in the Environment
Unit 4 Approaches to addressing environmental barriers
Module 3 Creativity and Intellectual Rights
Unit 1 Intellectual Properties and its Dimensions
Unit 2 Copyright Laws in Nigeria
Unit 3 Strategies for Protection of Intellectual Property (Original Ideas,
Concepts, Products, etc.)
Module 4 Technological Entrepreneurship
Unit 1 The Interface between Technology Development and
Entrepreneurship
Unit 2 Technological Environment and Business
Unit 3 New Technology and Entrepreneurship Opportunities
4
Module 5 Management and Innovation
Unit 1 The Concept, Nature and Types of Innovation
Unit 2 Innovation Theory of Entrepreneurship
Unit 3 Financing Innovation and New Ventures
Unit 4 Change Management
Unit 5 Technical Change and Management of Innovation
Module 6 Family Business and Succession Planning
Unit 1 The Concept of Family Business Contents
Unit 2 The Cultural Contexts of Family Business
Unit 3 Roles and Relationship in Family Business
Unit 4 Ownership Transfer and Succession in Family Business
Module 7 Women Entrepreneurship
Unit 1 The Concept of Women Entrepreneurship
Unit 2 Role orientation and Women Entrepreneurial Aspirations
Unit 3 Contributions of Women to National Socio-Economic and Human
Development
Unit 4 Barriers to Women Entrepreneurial Practice
Module 8 Social Entrepreneurship
Unit 1 The Concept of Social Entrepreneurship
Unit 2 Social Entrepreneurship and Value Creation
Unit 3 The Roles of Non-governmental Organizations in Social
Entrepreneurship
Unit 4 Social Entrepreneurship and Funding Opportunities
Unit 5 Social Entrepreneurship Enhancement Factors
Module 9 Business Opportunity Evaluation
Unit 1 Sources of Business Opportunities in Nigeria
Unit 2 The Difference between Ideas and Opportunities
Unit 3 Scanning Business Opportunities in Nigeria
Unit 4 Environment and New Venture Idea Generation
References and Further Readings
BusinessDictionary.Com (2010). “Entrepreneurship”.
http://www.businessdictionary.com/ definition/entrepreneurship.html.
Burnett, David (2000). “Hunting for Heffalumps: The Supply of
Entrepreneurship and Economic Development”.
http://www.technopreneurial.com/ articles/history.asp.
Cantillon, R. (circa 1730). In Putari, Vijith (2006). “Re: Evolution of
Entrepreneurship”.
5
http://www.managementparadise.com/forums/entrepreneurship/1118-
Evolution-entrepreneurship.html.
Deakins, D & Freel, M. (2009). Entrepreneurship and Small Firms. in Wikipedia
(2010). “Entrepreneur”. Wikipedia, the free
encyclopedia.http://en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/Entrepreneur#cite_ref-0.
Di-Masi, Paul (2010). “Defining Entrepreneurship”.
http://www.gdrc.org/icm/micro/definemicro.html.
Gartner (1988) in Putari, Vijith (2006). ―Re: Evolution of Entrepreneurshipǁ.
http://www.managementparadise.com forums/entrepreneurship/1118-
Evolution entrepreneurship.html.
Bathia, .D. (2013). Theories of entrepreneurship. Retrieved from
http://slideshare/theoriesof entrepreneurship.html
Ynkamat, O. (2009). Theories of entrepreneurship. http://scrib.com/theories of
entrepreneurship
Africansuccess.org. (2008). “Biographical Data: Aliko Dangote”.
http://www.africansuccess.org /visuFiche.php?id=469&lang=en.
Africansuccess.org. (2010). “Biographical data: Mike Adenuga”.
http://www.africansuccess. org/visuFiche.php?id=793&lang=en.
African Venture (2003). “Services”,
http://www.africanventuresinc.com/services.htm.
Bizcovering.com (2010). “The History of Entrepreneurship in Nigeria”.
http://bizcovering. com/ history/the-history-of-entrepreneurship-in-
nigeria/#ixzz0yDNj4Pxl.
Presentation Schedule
The presentation schedule gives you the important dates for the completion of
your computer-based tests, participation in forum discussions and participation at
facilitation. Remember, you are to submit all your assignments at the appropriate
time. You should guide against delays and plagiarisms in your work. Plagiarisms
is a criminal offence in academics and is highly penalized.
Assessment
There are two main forms of assessments in this course that will be scored: the
Continuous Assessments and the final examination. The continuous assessment
shall be in three-fold. There will be two Computer Based Assessment. The
computer-based assessments will be given in accordance to university
6
academic calendar. The timing must be strictly adhered to. The Computer
Based Assessments shall be scored a maximum of 10% each, while your
participation in discussion forums and your portfolio presentation shall be scored
maximum of 10% if you meet 75% participation. Therefore, the maximum score
for continuous assessment shall be 30% which shall form part of the final grade.
The final examination for GST204 will be maximum of two hours and it takes 70
percent of the total course grade. The examination will consist of 70 multiple
choice questions that reflect cognitive reasoning.
Note: You will earn 10% score if you meet a minimum of 75% participation in the
course forum discussions and in your portfolios otherwise you will lose the 10%
in your total score. You will be required to upload your portfolio using Google
Doc. What are you expected to do in your portfolio? Your portfolio should be
note or jottings you made on each study unit and activities. This will include the
time you spent on each unit or activity.
How to get the Most from the Course
To get the most in this course, you need to have a personal laptop and internet
facility. This will give you adequate opportunity to learn anywhere you are in the
world. Use the Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs) to guide your self-study in
the course. At the end of every unit, examine yourself with the ILOs and see if
you have achieved what you need to achieve.
Carefully work through each unit and make your notes. Join the online real time
facilitation as scheduled. Where you missed the scheduled online real time
facilitation, go through the recorded facilitation session at your own free time.
Each real time facilitation session will be video recorded and posted on the
platform.
In addition to the real time facilitation, watch the video and audio recorded
summary in each unit. The video/audio summaries are directed to salient part in
each unit. You can assess the audio and videos by clicking on the links in the
text or through the course page.
Work through all self-assessment exercises. Finally, obey the rules in the class.
Facilitation
You will receive online facilitation. The facilitation is learner centred. The mode
of facilitation shall be asynchronous and synchronous. For the asynchronous
facilitation, your facilitator will:
• Present the theme for the week;
• Direct and summarise forum discussions;
7
• Coordinate activities in the platform;
• Score and grade activities when need be;
• Upload scores into the university recommended platform;
• Support you to learn. In this regard personal mails may be sent.
• Send you videos and audio lectures; and podcast
For the synchronous:
• There will be eight hours of online real time contact in the course. This
will be through video conferencing in the Learning Management System.
The eight hours shall be of one-hour contact for eight times.
• At the end of each one-hour video conferencing, the video will be
uploaded for view at your pace.
• The facilitator will concentrate on main themes that are must know in the
course.
• The facilitator is to present the online real time video facilitation time table
at the beginning of the course.
• The facilitator will take you through the course guide in the first lecture at
the start date of facilitation
Do not hesitate to contact your facilitator. Contact your facilitator if you:
• do not understand any part of the study units or the assignment.
• have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises
• have a question or problem with an assignment or with your tutor’s
comments on an assignment.
Also, use the contact provided for technical support.
Read all the comments and notes of your facilitator especially on your
assignments, participate in the forums and discussions. This gives you
opportunity to socialise with others in the programme. You can raise any problem
encountered during your study. To gain the maximum benefit from course
facilitation, prepare a list of questions before the discussion session. You will
learn a lot from participating actively in the discussions.
Finally, respond to the questionnaire. This will help the university to know your
areas of challenges and how to improve on them for the review of the course
materials and lectures.
8
CONTENTS
Module 1 Development Entrepreneurship/Intrapreneurship 11
Unit 1 An Overview of the Definitions of Entrepreneurship and
Intrapreneurship 11
Unit 2 Concepts and Theories of Entrepreneurship 26
Unit 3 The Entrepreneurship Culture 36
Unit 4 Brief Biographical Studies of Prominent Nigerian
Entrepreneurs 47
Unit 5 Barrier to Entrepreneurial Practice 53
Module 2 The Nigerian Entrepreneurial Environment 63
Unit 1 The Business External Environment 63
Unit 2 Identifying Business Opportunities and Threats 70
Unit 3 Strategies for Exploring Opportunities in the Environment 74
Unit 4 Approaches to Addressing Environmental Barriers 78
Module 3 Creativity and Intellectual Rights 83
Unit 1 Intellectual Properties and its Dimensions 83
Unit 2 Copyright Laws in Nigeria 95
Unit 3 Strategies for Protection of Intellectual Property 105
(Original Ideas, Concepts, Products, etc.)
Module 4 Technological Entrepreneurship 108
Unit 1 The Interface between Technology Development and
Entrepreneurship 108
Unit 2 Technological Environment and Business 113
Unit 3 New Technology and Entrepreneurship Opportunities 136
Module 5 Management and Innovation 122
Unit 1 The Concept, Nature and Types of Innovation 122
Unit 2 Innovation Theory of Entrepreneurship 127
Unit 3 Financing Innovation and New Ventures 131
Unit 4 Change Management 136
Unit 5 Technical Change and Management of Innovation 139
Module 6 Family Business and Succession Planning 142
Unit 1 The Concept of Family Business Contents 142
Unit 2 The Cultural Contexts of Family Business 149
Unit 3 Roles and Relationship in Family Business 152
Unit 4 Ownership Transfer and Succession in Family Business 154
9
Module 7 Women Entrepreneurship 160
Unit 1 The Concept of Women Entrepreneurship 160
Unit 2 Role orientation and Women Entrepreneurial Aspirations 164
Unit 3 Contributions of Women to National Socio-Economic
and Human Development 167
Unit 4 Barriers to Women Entrepreneurial Practice 170
Module 8 Social Entrepreneurship 173
Unit 1 The Concept of Social Entrepreneurship 173
Unit 2 Social Entrepreneurship and Value Creation 177
Unit 3 The Roles of Non-governmental Organizations
in Social Entrepreneurship 182
Unit 4 Social Entrepreneurship and Funding Opportunities 185
Unit 5 Social Entrepreneurship Enhancement Factors 189
Module 9 Business Opportunity Evaluation 191
Unit 1 Sources of Business Opportunities in Nigeria 191
Unit 2 The Difference between Ideas and Opportunities 197
Unit 3 Scanning Business Opportunities in Nigeria 200
Unit 4 Environment and New Venture Idea Generation 203
10
Module 1 Development Entrepreneurship/Intrapreneurship
Unit 1 An Overview of the Definitions of Entrepreneurship and
Intrapreneurship
Unit 2 Concepts and Theories of Entrepreneurship
Unit 3 The Entrepreneurship Culture
Unit 4 Brief Biographical Studies of Prominent Nigerian Entrepreneurs
Unit 5 Barrier to Entrepreneurial Practice
Unit 1 An Overview of the Definitions of Entrepreneurship
and Intrapreneurship
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Entrepreneurship
3.2 Who is an Entrepreneur?
3.3 Who is an Intrapreneur?
3.4 Intrapreneurship
3.5 How is Entrepreneur different from Intrapreneur
3.6 Characteristics of Entrepreneur
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Often times many people go into one business or the other without the
businesses surviving, this is because of lack of understanding of how businesses
are created. This unit will introduce you to the formation of entrepreneurship and
the theories behind entrepreneurship formation.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Define the concept of entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship
• Differentiate between entrepreneurship and intrapreneurship
• Identify an entrepreneur and an intrapreneur by their characteristics.
11
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship has no universal definition like other disciplines as many
scholars have defined it differently according to their own perspective. But the
word entrepreneurship stems from the French word ‘entreprendre‘, which
indicates an act in which the individual attempt, or undertake an act of some sort.
In fact there are many definitions of the concept ‘entrepreneurship’. For instance,
Putari (2006) observes that scholars had not been in agreement in their
definitions of entrepreneurship and chronicled the definitions of entrepreneurship
by various scholars (Brockhaus & Horwitz, 1986, Sexton & Smilor, Wortman,
1987; Gartner, 1988). Cantillon (circa 1730) views entrepreneurship as: “self-
employment of any sort”. In 1934, Joseph Schumpeter equated entrepreneurship
with the concept of innovation and applied it to a business context, while
emphasizing the combination of resources. Penrose (1963) views
entrepreneurship as the activity that involves identifying opportunities within the
economic system. While Leibenstein (1968, 1979) perceives entrepreneurship as
involving "activities necessary to create or carry on an enterprise where not all
markets are well established or clearly defined and/or in which relevant parts of
the production function are not completely known”. Gartner (1988) conceives
entrepreneurship as the creation of new organizations. Okpara (2000) defines
entrepreneurship as the willingness and ability of an individual to seek out
investment opportunities in an environment and be able to establish and run an
enterprise successfully based on the identifiable opportunities. In addition,
Nwachukwu (1990) regards entrepreneurship as a process of seeing and
evaluating business opportunities, gathering the necessary resources to take
advantage of them and initiate appropriate action to ensure success.
After critically studying the above definitions, it can be summarized by concluding
that entrepreneurship is a function which involves the exploitation of opportunities
which exist within a market.
Thus, from the definitions above it could be said that while defining the concept
‘entrepreneurship’, emphasis was laid on a wide spectrum of activities such as
• Self-employment of any sort.
• Creation of organizations.
• Innovation applied to a business context.
• The combination of resources.
• Identification and exploitation of opportunities within the economic system
or market.
• The bringing together of factors of production under uncertainty.
12
It can be concluded that whatever activity that involves any or all of the above
activities can be regarded as Entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship refers to all the
processes and activities involved in establishing, nurturing, and sustaining a
business enterprise. Entrepreneur Scholars have also given several definitions of
the concept ‘entrepreneur’. For instance in 1816, Putari (2006) quoted Say, who
asserts that the entrepreneur is the agent "who unites all means of production
and who finds in the value of the products ... the reestablishment of the entire
capital he employs, and the value of the wages, the interest, and rent which he
pays, as well as profits belonging to himself." He views entrepreneurs as change
agents (Say, 1816). Knight (1921) views entrepreneurs as individuals who
attempt to predict and act upon change within markets.
Schumpeter (1934) conceives the entrepreneur as the innovator who implements
change within markets through the carrying out of new combinations such as
introduction of new techniques of production, reorganization of an industry and
innovation. He further argues that the entrepreneur is an innovator, one that
introduces new technologies into the workplace or market, increasing efficiency,
productivity or generating new products or services (Deakins and Freel, 2009).
Cantillon (circa 1730) conceptualized the entrepreneur as: the "agent who buys
means of production at certain prices in order to combine them" into a new
product (Schumpeter, 1951). In Quick MBA (2010), the entrepreneur is defined
as one who combines various input factors in an innovative manner to generate
value to the customer with the hope that this value will exceed the cost of the
input factors, thus generating superior returns that result in the creation of wealth.
Views of Entrepreneurship
Economist’s View
Entrepreneur and Entrepreneurship have been a point of interest to economics
as early as 1755. The term Entrepreneur seems to have been introduced into
Economics by Cantillon, but the Entrepreneur was first accorded prominence by
Say. It was variously translated into English as:
• merchant,
• adventurer and
• employer
Though the precise meaning is the ‘undertaker of a project,’ James Stuart Mill
popularized the term in England. The concept was vague, and not clear.
Entrepreneurs were looked as adventurer. Entrepreneurship was looked as
speculative activity. The economist sees an entrepreneur as someone who
combines resources such as labour, materials and other assets, introduces
changes, innovations and new orders for profitable and rewarding ends.
According to economists, entrepreneurship and economic growth will take place
13
in those situations where particular economic conditions are most favourable.
Economic incentives are the major drive for the entrepreneurial activities. They
firmly believe that a well-developed market and efficient economic policies foster
entrepreneurship. G.F. Papanek and J.R. Harris are the main advocates of this
theory. According to them, economic incentives are the main drive for the
entrepreneurial activities. In some cases, it is not so evident, but the persons
inner drives have always been associated with economic gains. Therefore, these
incentives and gains are regards as the sufficient conditions for the emergence of
industrial entrepreneurship.
When an individual recognizes that the market for a product or service is out of
equilibrium, he may purchase or produce at the prevailing price and sell to those
who are prepared to but at the highest price. Lack of entrepreneurship is due to
various kinds of market imperfections and inefficient economic policies.
B. Sociologist’s View
Entrepreneurship is inhibited by the social system, which denies opportunities for
creative facilities: The forces of custom, value system, the rigidity of status,
district of new ideas and the exercise of intellectual curiosity, combined together
creates an atmosphere inimical to experiment and innovation. Sociologists argue
that Entrepreneurship is most likely to emerge under a specific social culture.
The sociologist sees the Entrepreneur as goal-oriented and has the capacity to
adapt to changing environment. According to the sociologist, social sanctions,
cultural values and role expectations are responsible for the emergence of
entrepreneurship. Social-cultural values channel economic action that gives birth
to entrepreneurship.
C. Psychologist’s View
The psychologist sees an entrepreneur as someone who is being driven by
certain forces that are mainly internal, personal attributes and traits. The
phenomenon of entrepreneurship development has been viewed, explained and
interpreted differently. Among those who stressed the psychological aspects as
contributing to entrepreneurial success are Joseph Schumpeter, McClelland,
Hagen and Kunkal. The main centre of attention of these theories includes:
Schumpeter believes that entrepreneurs are primarily motivated by an atavistic
will to power, will to find a private kingdom or will to conquer.
According to McClelland, it is the high need for achievement which drives people
towards entrepreneurial activities. This achievement motive is inculcated through
child rearing practices, which stress standards of excellence, material warmth,
self-reliance training and low father dominance. Individuals with high
achievement motive tend to take keen interest in situations of high rest, desire for
responsibility and a desire for a concrete measure of task performance.
14
Hagen considers withdrawal of status respect as the trigger mechanism for
changes in personality formation. Status withdrawal is the perception on the part
of the members of some social group that their purposes and values on life are
not respected by groups in the society whom they respect.
Hagen identifies four types of events that cover produce status withdrawal: (a)
displacement by force, (b) denigration of valued symbols; (c) inconsistency of
status symbols with a changing distribution of economic power, and (d) non
acceptance of expected status on migration to a new society. According to
Psychologists, entrepreneurship is most likely to emerge when a society has
sufficient supply of individuals possessing particular psychological
characteristics. The main characteristics are:
• An institutional capacity to see things in a new way (vision),
• Energy of will and mind to overcome fixed habits of thought,
• An urge to do something,
• To fulfil a dream,
• The capacity to withstand social opposition; and
• The high need for achievement.
Self-Assessment Exercise
What is it that comes to your mind when you hear the word ‘entrepreneurship’
Feedback
• Having a vision you want to pursue.
• Creation of venture.
• Innovation
• The combination of resources.
• Identification and exploitation of opportunities within
the economic system.
• The bringing together the factors of production
• Taking risk for profit purposes
3.2 Who is an Entrepreneur?
The word "Entrepreneur" is derived from the French verb 'entrepredre'. It means
'to undertake'. In the early 16th century the Frenchmen who organized and led
military expeditions were referred to as 'Entrepreneurs'. In the early 18th century
French economist Richard Cantillon used the term entrepreneur to business.
Since that time the word entrepreneur means one who takes the risk of starting a
new organization or introducing a new idea, product or service to society.
15
According to J.B. Say, An entrepreneur is the economic agent who unites all
means of production; land of one, the labour of another and the capital of yet
another and thus produces a product. By selling the product in the market the
pays rent of land, wages to labour, interest on capital and what remains is his
profit. Thus an Entrepreneur is an organizer who combines various factors of
production to produce a socially viable product.
An entrepreneur can be regarded as a person who has the initiative skill and
motivation to set up a business or enterprise of his own and who always looks for
high achievements. He is the catalyst for social change and works for the
common good. They look for opportunities, identify them and seize them mainly
for economic gains. An action oriented entrepreneur is a highly calculative
individual who is always willing to undertake risks in order to achieve their goals.
According to Joseph Schumpeter, An entrepreneur in an advanced economy is
an individual who introduces something new in the economy, a method of
production not yet tested by experience in the branch of manufacturing
concerned, a product with which consumers are not yet familiar, a new source of
raw material or of new market and the likes.
According to Cantillon, An entrepreneur is the agent who buys factors of
production at certain prices in order to combine them into a product with a view to
selling it at uncertain prices in future. An entrepreneur is the person who bears
risk, unites various factors of production; to exploit the perceived opportunities in
order to evoke demand, create wealth and employment.
Pinson (2010) visualized the entrepreneur as a person who starts a business to
follow a vision, to make money, to be the master of his/her own soul (both
financially and spiritually) and is an "educated" risk taker. Pickle and
Abrahamson (1990) sees an entrepreneur as someone who organizes and
manages a business, undertakes and assumes the risks for the sake of profit
making. Murphy (2010) conceives an entrepreneur as a person who is dynamic
and continues to seek opportunities and/or different methods of operation and
will do whatever it takes to be successful in business.
Reiss (2010), views the entrepreneur as the person that recognizes and pursues
opportunities without regard to the resources he/she is currently controlling, with
confidence that he/she can succeed, with the flexibility to change course as
necessary, and with the will to rebound from setbacks. Envick and Langford
(2000) define an entrepreneur as someone who owns and operates his/her own
business. Bagby (1998) sees an entrepreneur as a person that utilizes the
opportunity of instability, turbulence, lack to produce something new or modifies
an existing one for profit motive.
16
In other words, Entrepreneur perceives the market opportunity and then has the
motivation, drive and ability to mobilize resources to meet it. An entrepreneur
has possession of a new enterprise, venture or idea and assumes significant
accountability for the inherent risks and the outcome (Wikipedia, 2010). He or
she has the capacity and willingness to undertake conception, organization, and
management of a productive venture with all attendant risks, while seeking profit
as a reward (Business Dictionary, 2010). Interestingly, small business experts
also have their definitions of the concept ‘entrepreneur’ (Thinking like, 2010) for
instance: Reiss (2010), views the entrepreneur as the person that recognizes
and pursues opportunities without regard to the resources he/she is currently
controlling, with confidence that he/she can succeed, with the flexibility to change
course as necessary, and with the will to rebound from setbacks.
Murphy (2010) conceives an entrepreneur as a person who is dynamic and
continues to seek opportunities and/or different methods of operation and will do
whatever it takes to be successful in business.
Given the above wide range of factors and behaviour which are used to define
the concept ‘entrepreneur’, we can see the difficulty and impossibility of finding a
unified definition of the ‘entrepreneur’. Hence, to Di-Masi (2010), the concept
‘entrepreneur’ can be best used in the past tense to describe a successful
business person. Thus, Entrepreneurs are business persons who identify the
existence of business opportunities and based on this they create businesses
thereby creating new products, new production methods, new markets and new
forms of organization to satisfy human needs and wants mostly at a profit.
It should also be noted that though most entrepreneurial businesses start small,
entrepreneurs are not only small business owners; they can also be big business
owners. This is because successful entrepreneurs, unlike small business owners,
are innovative and, when operating in an enabling business environment, can
rapidly create a large amount of wealth while bearing very high risk. In fact,
innovation is considered to be the strategic tool of entrepreneurs; this is one of
the tools that enable them gain strategic advantage over competitors (Quick
MBA, 2010). Entrepreneurs are individuals or group of individuals who carryout
entrepreneurship activities to build business empires.
Self-Assessment Exercise
1. Everyone doing business is an Entrepreneur.
True
Or
False
2. What are the main characteristics of an Entrepreneur?
17
Feedback
1. False
2. An Entrepreneur has:
a. Passion and Motivation. ...
b. Not Afraid to Take Risks. ...
c. Self-belief, Hard Work and Disciplined Dedication. ...
d. Adaptable and Flexible. ...
e. Product and Market Knowledge. ...
f. Strong Money Management. ...
g. Effective Planning (Not Over-Planning) Skills.
h. The Right Connections.
3.3 Who is an Intrapreneur?
There are given situations where an Entrepreneur is not able to establish his or
her own business and as such has to work in an organization. In this case they
are referred to as ‘Intrepreneurs’ i.e. Entrepreneurs within an organization. These
individuals are entrepreneurs in their own right because they pursue the
exploitation of business opportunities as they emerge and are also visionaries
within a given organization. Thus, once identified, these individuals should be
encouraged to manifest their entrepreneurial abilities to the benefit of the
organization otherwise they will be frustrated and may leave the organization or
start their own businesses. Entrepreneurship is the processes and activities by
which corporate organization behave entrepreneurially.
According to Jones, George and Hill (2000), an intrapreneur is a manager,
scientist, or researcher who works inside an existing organization and notices
opportunities for product improvements and is responsible for managing the
product development process. The above definition was corroborated by Pinchot
(1985), when he coined the term intrapreneur to represent an innovative
individual (employee) in an existing business organization who perceives new 17
market opportunities, secures resources and initiates the realization of the
opportunity. Rather than perform the roles of an entrepreneur as an independent
unit and for private economic gains, the intrapreneur performs the same roles
within an existing large organization to enhance the competitiveness and
profitability of the organization.
18
3.4 Intrapreneurship
Stoner et al., (2009) opined that in today’s faced-paced economy, companies
that do not keep up may go the way of the dinosaur. According to them, a large
number of companies have lost their entrepreneurial spirit that they started with.
As they have grown larger, their ability to be innovative and flexible may have
been stifled by the very size and success of the organization. Many concepts
have been used to describe how managers can keep organizations from
stagnating, make organizations adaptive, and promote organizational climates
that support creative learning. Perhaps, the most widely used term for this
process is intrapreneurship. Intrapreneurship or corporate entrepreneurship is
the process whereby an organization seeks to expand by exploring new
opportunities through new combinations of its existing resources.
Intrapreneurship requires special attention from managers, because by design it
cuts against the grain of established organizational activities. Thus, we might
expect that the following are important to support intrapreneurship:
1. Explicit goals for entrepreneurial processes
2. A system of information exchange between managers and
intrapreneurship
3. An emphasis on individual responsibility and accountability
4. Rewards for creative effort
Self-Assessment Exercise
Distinguish between Entrepreneur and Intrapreneur? Give Examples.
Feedback
According to Investopedia
The central difference between entrepreneurs and intrapreneurs is the
setting in which they work.
“An intrapreneur is an inside entrepreneur, or an entrepreneur within a
large firm, who uses entrepreneurial skills without incurring the risks
associated with those activities,”
Examples are:
1. Apple Corporation
2. Churches in Nigeria who apart from the church activities have:
Schools, mini industries such as soap making, water production etc.
19
3.5 How is entrepreneur different from intrapreneur
Whereas an entrepreneur is a person who creates a venture or starts up a
business and nurtures it, takes risks of bringing together the factors of production
to meet the society’s need at a profit, an intrapreneur works within an existing
organization to pursue the exploitation of business opportunities.
3.6 Characteristics of Entrepreneur
An entrepreneur must have certain traits in order to reach its full potentials. Some
of the characteristics are:
Motivation
Entrepreneurs are usually passionate, buoyant and highly self-motivated. They
have very high energy levels and are always willing to take initiatives. They are
usually concerned about their business and how to increase the market share,
how to improve their existing processes.
Risk Tolerance
The establishment of any entrepreneurial venture is risky and the entrepreneur
has to assume risk. As risk and rewards are inseparable, in order to grow, the
entrepreneur should have large appetite for assuming risk. Entrepreneurship is a
very risky venture; entrepreneurial decisions can have far-reaching impact on the
organization, people in the organization and even the economy. These decisions
are critical, enormous and cannot be easily reverted.
Vision
The entrepreneur is a visionary. One of the major responsibilities of an
entrepreneur decides the direction the business should go. It requires a strong
vision on the part of an entrepreneur to ensure his/her business reach maturity.
Mental ability and Creativity
The entrepreneur should anticipate changes and must be able to study the
various situations under which decisions have to be made. Successful
entrepreneurs have the creative ability to recognize and pursue opportunities.
They are always on a look out for new ways of doing things such as launching
new products, rebranding existing products, providing new services etc.
20
Clear Objectives
An entrepreneur has clarity about the objectives to be achieved in the business,
the nature of goods to be produced and subsidiary activities to be undertaken.
This clarity in objectives helps them to translate their business idea into reality
and gives the business a sense of direction.
Good Communication Skills
This basically pertains to communicate effectively. An entrepreneur who can
effectively communicate with customers, employees, suppliers and creditors will
be more likely to succeed than the entrepreneur who does not. An entrepreneur
must have a good feedback system.
Human Skills
An entrepreneur must have good human relations. The most important
personality factors contributing to the success of any entrepreneur include
emotional stability, good inter- personal relations, consideration and tactfulness.
An entrepreneur has to maintain good relations with his customers so as to
encourage them to continue to patronize his business. He must also maintain
good relations with his employees so as to motivate them to perform their jobs
with a high level of efficiency.
Technical skills
An entrepreneur must have the competence and proficiency in the knowledge of
the business. It is the possession of specialized knowledge and understanding in
methods, processes, procedures and techniques in carrying out day-to-day
activities. Examples are; coaching, organizing, monitoring environment amongst
others.
Self Confidence and Multi-Skilled
The entrepreneur must have self-confidence and believe in him/herself. Self-
confidence is an important characteristic that enables individuals to handle any
situation without having inferiority or any other type of complex. The entrepreneur
also has to be a jack of all trade and master of all. He/she must possess different
skills unlike other individuals. For instance, assuming an entrepreneur is a
marketer, the entrepreneur should not only possess marketing skills and
interpersonal skills but also language skills i.e. ability to speak more than one
language. This definitely will be an added advantage!
Confidence in the Face of Difficulties and Discouraging Circumstances: The
entrepreneur must be steadfast and resolute and be ready to move on even in
21
the face of adversity. He/she should be a ‘never say never’ kind of person;
everything is possible for the entrepreneur.
Innovative skills: The entrepreneur may not necessarily be an 'inventor' but the
one that can make a difference; he/she should be able to see what others cannot
see and be able to carve out a new niche in the market place.
Results-Orientated
The entrepreneur is one who knows how to get results under any circumstances
either with others or through others. The entrepreneur does this by setting goals
and ensuring that such goals are doggedly pursued by all concerned willingly and
with joy.
Risk-Taker
The business environment is dynamic and filled with uncertainties and risk. In
order to succeed the entrepreneur has to take risk. Successful entrepreneurs
take calculated risks and in some cases shift the risks to others.
Total Commitment
Starting /creating a new business is a serious exercise that requires a lot of
commitment and hard work. It is like bringing a child into the world and nurturing
the child to adulthood. This requires commitment, dedication, hard work, energy
and singlemindedness otherwise the ‘child’ (i.e. business) may die prematurely
(Di-Masi, 2010).
Calm
Entrepreneurs need to be cool, calm and collected. They have to remain calm
even when exposed to stress, emergency or crisis situations.
Focused:
In getting things done and starting and maintaining a business attention has to be
paid to a lot of details. Small things when not handled properly or noticed on time
may lead to disastrous outcomes.
Tolerance
The entrepreneur has to relate with people. People vary in terms of their
perceptions, personality, motivations and attitudes amongst other things. The
entrepreneur needs to be tolerant while not being weak, in order to get things
done.
22
Balance: Though, the entrepreneur is a human being, he/she has to be like a
super human being in order for him to succeed. To this effect, he/she has to be
able to balance all.
Rockstar (2008) recognized the characteristics of entrepreneurship to include
Creativity
Entrepreneurship entails innovations. It deals with product innovation, production
techniques innovation while bearing in mind the market
Dynamism
Entrepreneurship is a dynamic process that has to bear in mind the dynamic
business environment.
Purposefulness
Entrepreneurship is an activity embarked upon for a specific purpose. This could
be for profit making purposes, for humanitarian purposes or to bring a difference
to the market.
DiMasi (2010), on the other hand, regards the major characteristics of
entrepreneurs as:
• Self-confidence and being multi-skill,
• Confidence in the face of difficulties and discouraging circumstances,
• Results-orientation and total commitment.
• Stephenson (2010) believes that entrepreneurial characteristics are:
• Seriousness, planning ability, prudence, and team work.
Self-Assessment Exercise
1. Intrapreneurs can be identified through many traits, including all of these
EXCEPT _____.
a. passion
b. creativity
c. curiosity
d. shyness
2. Businesses that want to support intrapreneurship can do so in all of the
following ways EXCEPT:
a. Asking for employees' thoughts and opinions.
b. Creating a process for hearing and developing new ideas.
23
c. Encouraging the development of new ideas.
d. Fostering a culture where employees are afraid to speak up.
Feedback
1. d
2. d
4.0 Conclusion
There are business creators who come with business ideas either through
innovation or creativity. These creators of business are known as entrepreneurs.
Also, there are those who cannot necessarily create business but service the
business that have been created.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
BusinessDictionary.Com (2010). “Entrepreneurship”.
http://www.businessdictionary.com/ definition/entrepreneurship.html.
Cantillon, R. (circa 1730). In: Putari, Vijith (2006). “Re: Evolution of
Entrepreneurship”.
http://www.managementparadise.com/forums/entrepreneurship/1118- Evolution-
entrepreneurship.html.
Deakins, D & Freel, M. (2009). Entrepreneurship and Small Firms. in Wikipedia
(2010). “Entrepreneur”. Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Entrepreneur#cite_ref-0.
Di-Masi, Paul (2010). “Defining Entrepreneurship”.
http://www.gdrc.org/icm/micro/definemicro.html.
24
Gartner (1988). In Putari, Vijith (2006). ―Re: Evolution of Entrepreneurshipǁ.
http://www.managementparadise.com forums/entrepreneurship/1118-Evolution
entrepreneurship.html.
25
Unit 2 Concept and Theories of Entrepreneurship
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Evolution of the Concept of Entrepreneurship
3.2 Classical Theory
3.3 Neo-classical Theory
3.4 Psychological Theories of Entrepreneurship
3.5 Sociological Theory of Entrepreneurship
3.6 Social Marginality Model
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
The functionality of an entrepreneur is based on some established theories.
These theories covers the economic, social and psychological behaviour of an
entrepreneur. The different theories are discussed in this unit.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to appraise the theories of
entrepreneurship.
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Evolution of the concept of entrepreneurship
The concept of entrepreneurship was first established in the 1700s, and the
meaning has evolved ever since.
Earliest Period
During this period, Marco polo who was an Italian acted as a go-between. He
made attempts to trade routes to the Far East. As a go-between, he had to sign a
contract with a money person to sell his goods while as a merchant; he took
active role in trading by bearing all the physical and emotional risks involved in
the venture.
The economic theory of entrepreneurship considers the relationship between
economic conditions and incentives to arrive at a risk-reward equation that
informs a determination on whether or not to pursue a potential venture. This
theory assumes that the entrepreneurs is the one responsible for pulling
26
resources, labour, materials and other assets together in order to make their
value greater than before, and also introduce changes, innovations, creativity
and a new order.
Features of Economic Theory of Entrepreneurship
• Entrepreneurship and economic growth take place when the
economic conditions are favorable.
• Economic incentives are the main motivations for entrepreneurial
activities.
• Economic incentives include taxation policy, industrial policy,
sources of finance and raw material, infrastructure availability,
investment and marketing opportunities, access to information
about market conditions, technology etc.
Economic theories of entrepreneurship tend to understand business ventures in
terms of an innovator purchasing several factors of a product at a bulk rate,
combining them for resale at a higher rate but in the face of unknown market
conditions.
Economic factors that encourage or discourage entrepreneurship include:
• Taxation policy
• Industrial policy
• Easy availability of raw materials
• Easy access to finance on favorable terms
• Access to information about market conditions
• Availability of technology and infrastructure
• Marketing opportunities.
The economic theory of entrepreneurship is sub-divided into three namely;
Classical theory,
Neo-classical and Austrian Market Process
3.2 Classical Theory
The classical theory inscribed the virtues of free trade, specialization which was a
result of Britain‘s industrial revolution which took place in the mid-1700 and
lasted until the 1830s. The classical movement described the role of the
entrepreneur in the context of production and distribution of goods in a
competitive marketplace (Say, 1803). Classical theorists articulated three modes
of production: land; capital; and labour. There have been various objections to
the classical theory. These theorists failed to explain the dynamic upheaval
generated by entrepreneurs of the industrial age (Murphy, Liao & Welsch, 2006).
3.3 Neo-classical Theory
27
The neo-classical model emerged from the criticisms of the classical model and
indicated that economic phenomena could be relegated to instances of pure
exchange, reflect an optimal ratio, and transpire in an economic system that was
basically closed. The economic system consisted of exchange participants,
exchange occurrences, and the impact of results of the exchange on other
market actors. The importance of exchange coupled with diminishing marginal
utility created enough impetus for entrepreneurship in the neoclassical movement
(Murphy, Liao &Welsch, 2006).
Some criticisms were raised against the neo-classical conjectures. The first is
that aggregate demand ignores the uniqueness of individual-level entrepreneurial
activity. Furthermore, neither use nor exchange value reflects the future value of
innovation outcomes. Thirdly, rational resource allocation does not capture the
complexity of market-based systems. The fourth point raised was that, efficiency-
based performance does not subsume innovation and non-uniform outputs;
known means/ends and perfect or semi-perfect knowledge does not describe
uncertainty.
In addition, perfect competition does not allow innovation and entrepreneurial
activity. The fifth point is that, it is impossible to trace all inputs and outputs in a
market system. Finally, entrepreneurial activity is destructive to the order of an
economic system.
Austrian Market Process (AMP)
These unanswered questions of the neo-classical movement led to a new
movement which became known as the Austrian Market process (AMP). The
AMP, a model influenced by Joseph Aloi Schumpeter (1934) concentrated on
human action in the context of an economy of knowledge. Schumpeter (1934)
described entrepreneurship as a driver of market-based systems.
In other words, an important function of an enterprise was to create something
new which resulted in processes that served as impulses for the motion of
market economy.
The economic school of entrepreneurship considers the relationship between
economic conditions and incentives in order to arrive at a risk-reward equation
that informs a determination on whether or not to pursue a potential venture. The
school saw an entrepreneur as a merchant, adventurer and an employer. The
school was able to state the underlining economic factors that can lead to the
growth or decline of an entrepreneurial venture amongst such are taxation policy,
exchange rate and so on. The economic school is also subdivided into the
classical school, neo-classical and Austrian process market which serves an
addition to the general framework.
3.4 Psychological theories of Entrepreneurship
28
Psychological theory of entrepreneurship identifies traits, motives and
personalities as the major factors that infuse the entrepreneurial spirit in an
individual. The theory emphasizes personal characteristics that define
entrepreneurship. Personality traits, need for achievement and locus of control
are found to be associated with entrepreneurial inclination. The psychological
theory which focuses on personality factors, believes that entrepreneurs have
unique values and attitude towards work and life. Psychological attributes
differentiate entrepreneurs from non-entrepreneurs, and successful
entrepreneurs from unsuccessful ones. The psychological theories are:
i. Personality trait
ii. Need for achievement
iii. Locus of control
iv. Psychodynamic model
v. Risk taking propensity.
Personality Trait
According to the personality trait theory (2004), Personality trait is defined as
stable qualities that a person shows in most situationsǁ. Personality traits are the
enduring inborn qualities or potentials of the individual that naturally make
him/her an entrepreneur. Some of the traits which entrepreneur exhibits include
vision, enthusiastic, optimistic, flexible, open mindedness, and versatility
amongst others.
Need for achievement model
The need for achievement theory was propounded by McClelland (1961). The
theory explained that human beings have a need to succeed, accomplish, excel
or achieve. Entrepreneurs are usually driven by this need to achieve and excel.
This theory states that people desire to achieve something for their inner feeling
of accomplishment.
Observation/Criticisms.
This theory has been criticized as a result of the following:
i. The theory is contradictory and has limited evidence
ii. It has no direction for causality
iii. The theory is more applicable to the western culture where personal
achievement is more appreciated as compared to other culture
iv. It is limited only to business people while other people also show that
behaviour.
Locus of control
29
Locus of control was first introduced by Julian Rotter in the 1950s. Rotter (1966)
refers to Locus of Control as an individual‘s perception about the underlying main
causes of events in his/her life. Locus of control orientation is a belief about
whether the outcomes of our actions are contingent on what we do (internal
control orientation) or on events outside our personal control (external control
orientation). Entrepreneur‘s success comes from his/her own abilities and also
support from outside. This theory states that there is a degree to which one
believes that he/she is in control of one‘s destiny. This can either be internal or
external locus of control.
Internal Locus of control:
Individuals with an internal locus of control believe that they are able to control
life events
External locus of control:
Individual with an external locus of control believe that life's events are the result
of external factors, such as chance, luck or fate.
Observation/Criticism
• This theory correlates to the need for achievement theory (n-ach).
Individuals with internal locus of control people are the ones who are
interested in need for achievement than the externals.
• Directions of causality i.e. people tend to work harder when getting
success thus have internal locus of control.
• Culture and belief system; i.e. there are societies which their belief
system make them more externals (for example, those who believe that
God will do everything for them).
• Being internal is not always the best (An individual cannot always be in-
charge of everything such as weather and other peoples ‘behaviour).
• Locus of control (LOC) has negative influence on entrepreneurial
inclination.
Psycho-dynamic Model
This model was propounded by Kets de Vries. The model is concerned with how
people tend to be self-employed and become successful because of their
―troubled childhoodǁ. In troubled childhood, children tend to be abused, with low
self-esteem, and lack of confidence. Therefore, an individual growing in such an
environment does have reserved wishes towards those in control.
Self-Assessment Exercise
To be a good entrepreneur you must be:
30
a. patient
c. flexible
b. skilled
d. all correct
Feedback
D is the correct answer
Observations/criticism
1. This theory explains the behaviour of extreme category of people leaving
out the rest.
2. Some people with similar background do not show innovative
rebelliousness. Some tend to be criminals and/or drug addicts or
alcoholics.
Risk Taking
This theory contends about one‘s willingness to accept risk. People who are
more likely to accept risk and taking chances are more likely of being self-
employed than those who do not take risk.
Observations/Criticism
i. People tend to say that ―they take the profit and pass the risk to
someone elseǁ.
ii. People who take risks normally take a ―calculated riskǁ and do not
gamble.
iii. People who are success in business are moderate risk takers.
iv. Risk is not only a financial loss, but also image loss or loss of relationship
with other people in the society.
3.5 Sociological Theory of Entrepreneurship
The sociological theory is the third of the major entrepreneurship theories.
Sociological enterprise focuses on the social context. Reynolds (1991) has
identified four social contexts that relates to entrepreneurial opportunity.
i. The social networks: The social network focuses on building social
relationships and bonds that promote trust and not opportunism. In other
words, the entrepreneur should not take undue advantage of people in
order to be successful.
31
ii. The life course stage: This involves analyzing the life situations and
characteristic of individuals who has decided to become an entrepreneur.
The experiences of people influences their thought and action which
motivates them to do something meaningful with their lives.
iii. The ethnic identification. One‘s sociological background is one of the
decisive ―pushǁ factors to become an entrepreneur.
iv. The population ecology. Environmental factors play a vital role in the
survival of businesses. The political system, government legislation,
customers, employees and competition are some of the environmental
factors that have an effect on the survival of new venture or the success of
the entrepreneur.
The sociological theory of entrepreneurship embraces social culture as a driving
force of entrepreneurship. The entrepreneur becomes a role player in agreement
with the role expectations of the society, and such role expectations are based
on religious beliefs, taboos, and customs. Sociological models that have received
significant empirical support are the intergeneration inheritance of enterprise
culture, social marginality and ethnicity.
Assumptions of the Sociological theory of entrepreneurship
• Entrepreneurship is likely to get a boost in a particular social culture
• Society‘s values, religious beliefs, customs, taboos influences the
behaviour of individuals in a society
• The entrepreneur is a role performer according to the role expectations by
the society
3.6 Social marginality model
This theory suggests that individuals who recognize a strong level of
incongruence between their personal attributes and the role they hold in society
will be motivated to change or reconstruct their social reality. Some individuals
may reconstruct their reality by changing careers, employers, or result to self-
employment. Marginal men are referred as individuals who are less included or
integrated in their society.
Marginal men are usually not completely part of the society of their adoption as
such; they are free of the restrictions imposed by the value system governing the
society. At the same time, having left their own society, they are no longer
constrained by its dominant values. This situation brings about the development
of unconventional patterns of behaviour, which increases their propensity to
become entrepreneurs.
32
Observations/Criticism
i. Marginality is not an adequate explanation for the over-representation of
certain people in entrepreneurship carriers e.g. Hispanics and Africans are
underrepresented in entrepreneurship despite them being marginal.
ii. Aggressiveness and co-operation is an attribute in which marginal people
tend to have.
Ethnicity
An ethnic origin of a person is said to influence the choice between paid
employment and self-employment as well as performance in self-employment.
Evidence of over-representation of certain ethnic groups in business carriers
abounds throughout the world. The ethnic groups often quoted in the literature as
being overrepresented in entrepreneurship include Ibos in Nigeria, Kikuyus in
Kenya and Chagga in Tanzania. All of these are spread in different parts of their
countries in which they over-represented in entrepreneurial careers. To this
extent, they are less integrated in the societies in which they work and therefore
less likely to be constrained by dominant values shared either by their own ethnic
group or by their hosts.
Observations/Criticism
It has been found that, even members of these groups (Ibo, Kikuyu and Chagga)
who have remained in their homelands are quite active in entrepreneurship.
Therefore their cultures must have influenced their entrepreneurial behaviour
rather than ethnicity.
Inter-Generational Inheritance of Enterprise Culture
This theory asserts that entrepreneurial practice is largely inherited.
Consequently, offspring‘s of entrepreneurial parents are more likely to become
entrepreneurs and more successful as compared to others. A strong grounding in
business and ownership ethic at an early age is a very vital tool and powerful
driving force for children as they choose their future careers. An individual who
grows up around a family that runs and own a business is likely to benefit from
the skills, accumulated experiences and networks of existing firm. Such an
individual will have better access to advice, credit, established markets and
sources of inputs.
33
Observations/ Criticisms
Several studies supports this theory, however studies on female
entrepreneurship found that most of them were first generation entrepreneurs
and none of their parents have been running their own business.
Other studies also found that there is no significant difference between
entrepreneurs and managers in terms of having self-employed parents. However
this is the most supported sociological model.
Critique of Sociological Studies of Entrepreneur
Sociologists’ approach is seen to be mono-casual and fails to generalize the
theory to explain the reasons all those who belong to their chosen classes
4.0 Conclusion
The knowledge of the different theories will help you assess the behaviour of an
entrepreneur. Also as to be entrepreneur it will guide you on what you need to
do or guide against in your functionality as an entrepreneur. The knowledge of
entrepreneurship theories is key in becoming a successful entrepreneur.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Bathia, .D.( 2013). Theories of entrepreneurship. Retrieved from
http://slideshare/theoriesof entrepreneurship.html
Ynkamat, O. (2009). Theories of entrepreneurship. http://scrib.com/theories of
entrepreneurship
Patrick J. Murphy, Jianwen Liao, Harold P. Welsch, (2006) "A conceptual history
of entrepreneurial thought", Journal of Management History, Vol. 12 Issue: 1,
pp.12-35, https://doi.org/10.1108/13552520610638256
34
Coon, D. (2004). Introduction to Psychology (9th Ed) Minneapolis: West
Publishing Company.
Davidson, P., & Honing, B. (2003), “The role of social and human capital among
nascent entrepreneurs”,
Journal of Business Venturing, 20,121.
Drucker, P.F. (1985).Innovation and Entrepreneurship. New York: Harper & Row
Publishers
(PDF) Entrepreneurship theories and Empirical research: A Summary Review of
the Literature. Available from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/230814855_Entrepreneurship_theories
_and_Empirical_research_A_Summary_Review_of_the_Literature .
35
Unit 3 The Entrepreneurship Culture
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Every activity carried out by human being is surrounded by certain cultural values
and ethics which depict the behaviour of certain group or people. You can easily
guess the tribe or ethnic group a particular person is from through his/her cultural
behaviour. This cultural values is also extended to different professions. Every
profession has its culture. This is not different with the entrepreneurs. In this
unit, you will learn about the different cultural values and behaviour of an
entrepreneur.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to demonstrate the different culture of an
entrepreneur.
3.0 Main Content
Culture is a hot slogan among corporate and entrepreneurial companies alike. It's
what everyone is striving for, what brings on the loyalty, what attracts and keeps
the really remarkable employees.
The term applies to individuals, teams, and entire organizational cultures. An
entrepreneurial culture is what many companies hope for. Certainly, in the fast-
moving and competitive technology industry, an entrepreneurial culture is what
most organizations should strive for.
Earlier definitions of entrepreneurship have referred to creation and running of
innovative businesses by people sharing a number of characteristics. Broadly
speaking, entrepreneurship also includes innovative positive social interventions
(to be dealt with under Social Entrepreneurship in a later Unit).
36
Culture refers to attitudes and values which in the case of entrepreneurship may
be linked with autonomy, creativity and sense of responsibility (soft skills) and so
on. It also refers to entrepreneurial knowledge and skills and management
competencies which have to be acquired (hard skills).
The hard aspects of culture apply to entrepreneurship because without them, an
entrepreneurial culture would not develop into a tangible act. Culture, is the
fundamental mechanism of principles linking to a specific community, and builds
the progression of distinct personality uniqueness and motivates people in the
culture to utilize in behaviours which are not noticeable in different societies.
Our line of reasoning behind the general statement on traditionalistic culture and
entrepreneurship is based on two arguments: First, traditionalism of the society
may be helpful in dealing with the insecurities and uncertainties of
entrepreneurship by providing social supports. Due to the scarcity of alternatives
and undeveloped institutional supports, entrepreneurs in low-and-medium GDP
countries have to rely much more on their cultural support systems than
entrepreneurs in high GDP countries. Thus, traditionalism of a society helps
entrepreneurship because traditional societies provide more social help and
supports, in the form of family or friends (which is congruent with high in-group
collectivism and high humane orientation). Given the availability of alternative
avenues to survive and formal institutional support, the above argument does not
hold for high GDP countries. The second line of reasoning is that in traditional
societies the most promising avenue of actually escaping traditional paths of
careers may be entrepreneurship. This line of reasoning can be most clearly
developed for power distance. In societies with high power distance, a low status
person will always continue to be a low status person: The only way out may be
to become an entrepreneur. Not only does this allow a person to escape a
dominant boss, entrepreneurship may also enable the person to escape the
route that was preordained by the status of one’s birth. In China, the harsh
system of HuJi (Household registration) produces a great deal of necessity-
driven entrepreneurs during the early age of Reform and Opening Up. In India, it
is full of examples in which an “untouchable” escaping their humble status by
becoming rich entrepreneurs as well. This approach is more likely to be
successful in low-and-medium GDP countries, because there are other avenues
and resources to achieve a certain kind of independence in rich countries (for
example, by individually striving for further education, by moving away from a
certain environment to another one, etc.).
Similar to the logic of Hertzberg’s Motivation – Hygiene theory in organizational
behaviour (Herzberg, 1968), we argue that to interpret the different kinds of
entrepreneurial activities, we need different types of culture. By using Motivation-
Hygiene theory as a metaphor, we argue that traditionalistic cultures function as
‘hygiene’ factors for the prevalence of entrepreneurship, but modernistic cultures
play a ‘motivating’ role in achieving for high quality entrepreneurship. Therefore,
we assume that to produce more high-growth entrepreneurship and high-
innovation entrepreneurship, modernistic cultures are more useful than
37
traditionalistic cultures. Modernistic cultures encourage people to achieve high
performance and to be unique (innovation), to invest for the future, to be
confident and aggressive (high growth orientation), having more plans and rules
(it is good for continuous improvement of products, services and management
systems); therefore, modernistic cultures are more consistent with the two
essences of entrepreneurship: innovation and growth-orientation. Thus,
characteristics of a modernistic culture are helpful for innovation and high-growth
entrepreneurship. Meanwhile, high-growth and high-innovation entrepreneurship
is more likely to appear in contexts where the environment provides opportunities
and resources. Since high GDP countries provide a richer environment for such
venturing activities, a modernistic culture should foster more growth-oriented
entrepreneurship and innovation-oriented entrepreneurship in high GDP
countries than in low-and-medium GDP.
Since most of cross-cultural studies on entrepreneurship are based on individual
cultural dimensions, we will test whether our basic hypothesis works well on them
one by one. In the following section we will first describe those cultural
dimensions in the GLOBE study which bear on the traditionalism of society: in-
group collectivism, humane orientation, and power distance, and then discuss
the other dimensions related to modernism: performance orientation, future
orientation and uncertainty avoidance. In the end, we will simply discuss the
cultural dimensions that may be closely related to entrepreneurship in theory, but
excluding from this study three other GLOBE cultural dimensions: institutional
collectivism, gender egalitarian and assertiveness.
Collectivism versus Individualism
In-group collectivism measures the degree to which individuals express pride,
loyalty and cohesiveness in their groups and families (House, Javidan, Hanges,
& Dorfman, 2002). Societies with a high level of in-group collectivism make
greater distinctions between in-group and out-group (Gelfand, Bhawuk, Hishi, &
Bechtold, 2004). In high in-group collectivistic societies, people depend heavily
on their special personal relationships, like Guanxi in the context of China, Inhwa
in Korea and Blat in Russia instead of institutional supports (Michailova & Worm,
2003; Zhao, Frese, & Giardini, 2010). Moreover, in-group collectivism
emphasizes group goals (Hofstede, 1980). In-group collectivism has been related
to entrepreneurial activities for a number of reasons. In most situations, in-group
collectivism is assumed to be negatively related to entrepreneurship. First,
entrepreneurship is an activity of enterprising individuals who are individually
rewarded (see review by Hayton et al., 2002). Second, entrepreneurship includes
taking personal risks associated with market entry and innovation (Shane et al.,
1995). Third, successful entrepreneurs must have characteristics such as
creativity and the ability to develop new and unique ideas, characteristics which
are typically associated with individualistic orientations (Bhawuk & Udas, 1996).
These arguments favour the position that collectivism is negatively related to
entrepreneurial activities (for example, review by Hayton et al., 2002).
38
However, the position that individualism is related directly to innovation and
entrepreneurship is not uncontested. Shane et al. (1995) showed that
individualism should influence the type, rather than the absolute levels, of
innovation strategy. Moreover, Morris, Avila and Allen (1993) argued that high
individualism can be dysfunctional for innovation, and reported a curvilinear
relationship between individualism and entrepreneurship. These arguments
illustrate that there are no simple relationships between entrepreneurship,
individualism and collectivism. It has been argued that collectivism helps
entrepreneurship because collectivistic societies provide more social support and
resources. For example, families in collectivistic societies tend to be more helpful
in providing the needed resources for one’s entrepreneurial endeavours and the
needed social security in the event that things do not work out. Moreover,
collectivistic orientation fosters commitment and sacrifice amongst employees
(Gelfand et al., 2004) and provides a protective environment that minimizes the
uncertainty associated with business creation and innovation implementation
(Stewart, 1989). However, all of these aspects are important only in low-and-
medium GDP countries and not in high GDP countries because of the availability
of alternative resources in the latter. It is only in low-and-medium GDP countries
that starting entrepreneurs need to be able to fall back on these traditional
resources of in-group collectivism
Humane Orientation
Humane orientation is the degree to which societies encourage and reward
individuals for being fair, altruistic, friendly, generous, caring, and being kind to
others (House et al., 2002). In high humane oriented societies, people within a
close circle receive material, financial, and social support (Kabasakal & Bodur,
2004). In addition, it means that there is a high degree of compassion and help
for people in the immediate neighborhood, and also a certain conservative
attitude and pressure for conformism towards people (Schloesser, Frese, & Al,
2010). We would argue similarly that, as with in-group collectivism, that humane
orientation helps the development of entrepreneurship because it provides
resources and support in the event that things go wrong within the immediate
environment of the entrepreneur. Thus, entrepreneurs will feel supported and
sufficiently secure to start and develop a business. In addition, humane
orientation allows for errors and failures. This means that the social environment
will still be supportive and people will not be ostracized when they fail.
Moreover, people who had failed may actually be encouraged to try again. Given
that the fear of failure is one of the reasons why people do not start a business
even though they might want to (Sternberg, 2000), there may be a direct effect
between humane orientation and entrepreneurial activity. We hypothesize that
the effect of humane orientation is likely to be stronger in low-and-medium GDP
countries because the consequences of failure in low-and-medium GDP
countries without welfare systems is worse than those in high GDP countries.
39
Thus, it follows:
The positive relationship between humane orientation and the quantity of
entrepreneurial activities (early-stage entrepreneurship and established
entrepreneurship) is stronger in low-and-medium GDP countries than in high
GDP countries.
Power Distance
Power distance measures the degree to which members of a society expect and
agree that power should be unequally distributed (House et al., 2002). Societies
with higher power distance tend to be restricted to limited upward social mobility,
localized information, and social status which is linked to established power
relationships, as opposed to merit.
Researchers have argued that entrepreneurial activity should be higher in low
power distance countries (Hayton et al., 2002). High power distance is
associated with maintaining the status quo (Gelekanycz, 1997). Accordingly,
there is little acceptance for the initiatives and innovations created by new
business ventures. Moreover, high power distance countries distribute resources
unequally. This makes it difficult for potential entrepreneurs of low power groups
to take advantage of profitable opportunities and, as a result, reduces access to
resources, skills, and information for potential entrepreneurs who are in a lower
position. Unfortunately, reduced resources and information reduces both the
existence and the discovery of valuable business opportunities (Kirzner, 1997).
However, power distance can have a positive impact on entrepreneurial
behaviour as well. Power distance can affect entrepreneurial activity positively
because the only way to be independent is to be an entrepreneur.
Entrepreneurship can be used as one of the tools to struggle for independence
and to increase one’s power position.
Performance Orientation
Performance orientation refers to the extent to which a society encourages and
rewards its members for performance improvement and excellence (Hayton et
al., 2002). This dimensionis clearly based on the achievement motive idea by
McClelland (1961) . Entrepreneurs often strive to achieve challenging tasks.
They believe that they can succeed and they want to harvest the benefits for
doing so. Thus, performance orientation should be associated with a society’s
entrepreneurial activity in general. Moreover, since performance orientation
focuses on demanding targets and financial rewards, we expect that countries
with high performance orientation have a higher prevalence of entrepreneurial
activities with high-growth orientation (high-growth entrepreneurship) and more
innovation on new products and new services (high-innovation entrepreneurship)
than others. Furthermore, in high GDP countries there are plenty of resources
40
(for example, venture capital, educated employees, law service, technical know-
how, etc.), therefore, it is relatively easy for entrepreneurs to achieve their high-
growth and high-innovation goal, but it is hard for those entrepreneurs in low-
and-medium GDP countries make the same things happen. Therefore, we
propose the following hypotheses:: Performance orientation is positively related
to high quality entrepreneurship (high-growth entrepreneurship and high-
innovation entrepreneurship). Further, this kind of positive relationship is stronger
in high GDP countries than in low-and-medium GDP countries.
Masculinity versus Femininity
The dimension is masculinity, which portrays the role of gender and the disparity
between men’s values and women’s values in a country. In feminine societies the
women have the same self-effacing, group morals like men; in the dominating
masculine communities as they are to a little degree forceful and forceful, but not
like men, so that these communities portrays a split between women's ethics and
men's ethics.
Future Orientation
Future orientation addresses the degree to which individuals engage in future-
oriented behaviours such as planning, investing in the future, and delaying
gratification (House et al., 2002). Countries with high future orientation have a
strong capability and willingness to imagine future contingencies, formulate future
goal states, seek to achieve higher goals, and to develop strategies for meeting
their future aspirations (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000).
Future orientation is related to two, and at times competing, orientations. First,
countries high in future orientation should have more high quality entrepreneurial
activity. Individuals anticipate potential future opportunities in a changing
environment and will tend to think of investing now in order to reap future profits
(Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). Second, future orientation also implies that one
thinks about the future because one is worried about the future. Future
orientation is highly related to uncertainty avoidance (Ashkanasy, Gupta,
Mayfield, & Trevor-Roberts, 2004). Thus, one anticipates not opportunities, but
failures. Thus, this part of future orientation should be negatively related to the
emergence of entrepreneurship because people might be too worried about
future problems to get them involved in uncertain endeavors.
Furthermore, to produce high-growth entrepreneurship and high-innovation
entrepreneurship in one society, only future orientation is not enough, it also
needs a stable and expectable environment in support of them.
Uncertainty Avoidance
41
Uncertainty is a conceptual cornerstone in the theory of entrepreneurship
(Knight, 1921; McMullen & Shepherd, 2006). Entrepreneurs have to recognize
opportunities in the face of uncertainty (Knight, 1921) and are willing to bear
uncertainty when exploiting opportunities (Schumpeter, 1934). People in high
uncertainty avoidant countries are threatened by new and unpredictable future
situations (Hofstede, 1980). They show a stronger desire to establish rules,
allowing for predictability of behaviour (Sully De Luque & Javidan, 2004).
Members of such cultures tend to avoid uncertainty by reliance on social norms,
rituals, and bureaucratic practices to alleviate the unpredictability of future events
(House et al., 2002). Such practices include formalized interaction,
documentation and planning, as well as resistance to risk, change and new
product development. Such practices may suggest that high uncertainty avoidant
countries have little support for entrepreneurship (Hayton et al., 2002). Two
studies found indirect support for a negative relationship between uncertainty
avoidance and entrepreneurial activities (Mueller & Thomas, 2000; Shane, 1995).
In contrast to this, one study indicated that uncertainty avoidance is positively
related to the prevalence of business ownership across countries (Wennekers,
Thurik, Van Stel, & Noorderhaven, 2007), possibly because entrepreneurial
employees are discriminated by the formal structure of organizations, and are
therefore pushed into entrepreneurship. While we assume that uncertainty
avoidance may be negatively related to the emergence of early-stage
entrepreneurship, it can very well be functional with regards to some types of
entrepreneurial activity. High uncertainty avoidance implies long-term planning,
environment scanning and the prediction of future developments. Thus,
uncertainty avoidance directly 10 addresses the uncertainties associated with
business venturing, for example, by reducing the risk in business and creating a
safe environment. In addition, high uncertainty avoidance is also helpful in
increasing the quality of products and services, for continuous improvement and
so on (this is exactly the cases of Japan and Germany). Thereby, uncertainty
avoidance leads to new products development and business growth. Similar to
future orientation, we argue that this kind of positive relationship between
uncertainty avoidance and high quality entrepreneurship appears more frequently
in high GDP countries than in low-and-medium GDP countries.
According to David Mc Clelland (1961), an entrepreneur is a dynamic person
who takes calculated risks. This definition has a behaviourist orientation. Fillion
(1990) defines the entrepreneur as someone who imagines, develops and
realizes a vision. In economic terms, one may define an entrepreneur as
someone who combines resources in such a way as to add value. A
psychologist’s point of view may be that: an entrepreneur is someone who feels
the need to accomplish something, to realize his/her potential or to become his
own boss.
Across all above definitions, there is a recurrence of underlying notions like:
vision, value creation, innovation, risk-taking and self-accomplishment. Having
reviewed the characteristics of entrepreneurs, one is tempted to conclude that an
42
entrepreneur is a product of his/her particular environment. Several authors have
shown that entrepreneurs reflect the characteristics of the time and place where
they have evolved (Toulouse, 1990). The cultures, the needs and the habits of a
particular country or region shape the behaviour of entrepreneurs. Obviously
enough, with the falling of frontiers (both geographical and psychological)
entrepreneurs exert an influence that goes far beyond their own countries and/or
regions.
Entrepreneurial Culture
Culture can be defined as the mix of norms, values and beliefs that are shared by
a particular community be it a business community, a cultural (or ethnic)
community, a country, or a geographical region.The concept of “entrepreneurial
culture” has existed for decades, described as an organizational culture
representing and defending entrepreneurial characteristics and attributes. These
have included risk-taking, innovation, and creativity; the elements one would
expect to see among entrepreneurs as individuals. The literature suggests that
entrepreneurial culture is related to a number of positive organizational
outcomes, such as generating new business and improving firm performance.
Cultural Values
Linton (1975) describes values as a predisposition to act in a certain way.
Values of entrepreneurs:
According to Sexton & Bowman (1986), entrepreneurship is a value in itself for
Americans. Different authors suggest different values for entrepreneurs:
Kets de Vries (1984): reputation, power, status and recognition. Gordon Survey
of values (1976): independence, efficacy and a negative reaction to
affiliation.There is a general presumption that a society may have potential
entrepreneurs, but only becomes entrepreneurial if it has a culture that supports
innovation and initiative.
Cultural Attitudes
According to J. M. Toulouse (1990), entrepreneurial culture is favoured by the
following set of attitudes:
1. Business activities are valued.
2. Individual and collective initiatives are highly rated.
3. Determination and perseverance are desirable qualities.
4. An equilibrium between security and risk is accepted.
5. The tension between stability and change is resolved.
Therefore, in a society favouring entrepreneurship, entrepreneurs are role
models who are not only acceptable, but desirable.
43
Elements of Entrepreneurship Culture
• People and empowerment focused
• Value creation through innovation and change
• Attention to the basics
• Hands-on management
• Doing the right thing
• Freedom to grow and to fail
• Commitment and personal responsibility
• Emphasis on the future and a sense of urgency
Components of culture
Values
Rules of Conduct
Vocabulary
Methodology
Rituals
Myths and Stories.
According to Fortin (2003), entrepreneurial culture can be rooted in a society
through four main avenues:
- The family
- Education
- Existing business organizations; and
- Local and national authorities and leaders.
Difficulties Faced in Establishing an Entrepreneurial Culture
• Ignorance: Where people fail to capture the important role of
entrepreneurship, for instance, in poverty alleviation.
• Laziness: For example in communities who have got used to being
assisted.
• Fear: Risk aversion
• Religious/Cultural constraints: Communities/societies where business and
profit making are perceived as being against cultural/religious values
For the entrepreneurial business, its culture begins from day one. The culture is a
reflection of the values the entrepreneur brings into the business.
Culture is important for an entrepreneurial venture because it is the mechanism
that institutionalizes the values of its founders. Culture serves to socialize new
employees. It helps them understand how they should treat the customers, how
they should treat each other, how they should act in their jobs, and how to
generally fit in and be successful within the business.
Discussion Forum
44
Culture refers to attitudes and values which in the case of entrepreneurship may
be linked with autonomy, creativity and sense of responsibility and hard work. In
your context, does the cultural environment encourages entrepreneurship and
self-reliance?
Post your reasons for your opinion on the discussion forum.
4.0 Conclusion
To become a successful entrepreneur, you must possess the value system of an
entrepreneur in the area of creation and innovation of ideas that can sustain the
business, relating with people, managing the business, and studying the
economic trend of the environment.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
O’Brien P, Pike A, 2015, “City deals, decentralisation and the governance of local
infrastructure funding and financing in the UK” National Institute Economic
Review 233(1) R14-R26
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/78917933.pdf
Kramer J-P, Marinelli E, Iammarino S, Revilla Diez J, 2011. “Intangible assets as
drivers of innovation: empirical evidence on multinational enterprises in German
and UK regional systems of innovation” Technovation 31(9) 447–458.
Krätke S, 2010, “Regional knowledge networks: A network analysis approach to
the interlinking of knowledge resources” European Urban and Regional Studies
17(1) 83–97 doi: 10.1177/0969776409350794.
Laursen K, Masciarelli F, Prencipe A, 2012, “Regions matter: how localized
social capital affects innovation and external knowledge acquisition”
Organizational Science 23(1) 177-193.
45
Lawton Smith H, Romeo S, Virahsawmy M, 2012, “Business and professional
networks: scope and outcomes in Oxfordshire” Environment and Planning A 44
1801–1818.
46
Unit 4 Brief Biographical Studies of Prominent Nigerian
Entrepreneurs
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
There are different things that inspire one to go into being an entrepreneur.
Apart from being inspired by the challenges in the society, one could also be
inspired by the achievements of existing entrepreneurs. Often times you study
other people’s life to know why they are doing what they do and how they do it.
In the case of becoming an entrepreneur, do the existing successful
entrepreneurs go into it as passion towards providing solution to existing
challenges? Do they go into it because others are doing it? What is their motives
and the secret of their success? These are some of the questions you might find
answer to as you study this unit.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to articulate your entrepreneurial skills.
3.0 Main Content
Aliko Dangote
This Nigerian entrepreneur was born in 1957. He created the Dangote Group and
is considered to be one of the richest men in Africa. The Dangote group is a big
organization that is into export, import, manufacturing, real estate and
philanthropy. Some of the products it deals with are: spaghetti, macaroni, sugar,
salt, rice textile materials, while the Group is also into transportation, packaging,
and even security. The Dangote Group imports sugar, rice, fish, and cement,
fertilizer and building materials. While it exports cotton, cocoa, cashew nuts,
sesame seed, ginger and gum. Aliko Dangote has contributed tremendously to
the economic development of Nigeria and has greatly assisted in reducing the
rate of unemployment in the country by providing employment to Nigerian
graduates and even other categories of labour (Africansuccess.org, 2008;
Nairaland.com, 2010).
47
Chidi Anyaegbu
This entrepreneur is regarded as ‘King’ of the transport industry. He founded the
Chisco Transport Limited which is one of the biggest in the Nigerian transport
industry. Over the years, Chisco Transport Limited grew to become the Chisco
Group. The Chisco group is into variety of businesses such as: oil and gas,
finance, hospitality, real estate, import and export. Apart from this he has also
contributed tremendously to the development of the nation through various
philanthropic activities. For instance, he established a foundation to take care of
his philanthropic interests and also built a Faculty of Business building for
Transport Studies at the Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Awka (Prince Society, 2009;
Nairaland.com, 2010; Onyima, 2010).
Chris Ejiofor
This is an entrepreneur in the importation and marketing of car or auto batteries.
He established Dimaps Batteries and has written extensively about usage and
maintenance of batteries in Nigeria.
Bello-Osagie Hakeem
He was born in Lagos. His father was a professional Gynecologist and his
mother was a Nurse. At age three, he moved with his parents to England. He
lived in England until he was about eight and then he came back to Nigeria
where he went to primary and secondary school. He left Nigeria when he was
about sixteen and did his last years of high school in England. He started
University at about eighteen and was in University of England for five years and
then in the United States for two years from age twenty-three to twenty-five. . He
came again to Nigeria and ventured into the financial area and his first
experience was in First Securities Discount House, which was a small institution
he established. His interest in a large bank stemmed from his first experience
into the purchase of the United Bank for Africa.(Nwoye 2010).
Hussan Okoya
Born in Lagos Island on June 8, 1935. His father Hussan Okoya Thomas, was
one of the people who established CFAO in Nigeria. His mother Alhaja Suwebat
Okoya-Thomas was a renowned trader. He had his education at the Princess
School, Lagos Island in the early forties. He thereafter proceeded to the Lagos
Baptist Academy in the late 50s.
48
He later moved to Balham and Toothing College of Commerce, United Kingdom.
He eventually qualified as a Professional Accountant at the Columbia University,
New York, United State of America.
There, Okoya-Thomas exhibited traits of good leadership and his approach to
work was astounding. He soon proved himself an indispensable material at his
duty post and rewarded with the position of Director in 1975.
Orji Uzoh Kalu
Business Name: Slok Group of Companies
Orji Kalu is from Igbere a largely business community in the East where trading is
a way of life. While he was at the University of Maiduguri, he was a member of
the executive of the students union. There was a big riot, which led to a lot of
vandalism. The university authorities suspended the student union leaders. He
was one of them. It was during this period that he decided to go into trading. He
started his business which involved the buying and selling of palm oil with a
capital of less than five thousand naira. His mother who was also, an astute
trader provided the initial capital. He bought oil from the East and sold it in the
North, at Maiduguri. There, he discovered the need for good furniture; People
who needed good furniture imported them from overseas at exorbitant rates.
Knowing that there were many good upholstered furniture made in Aba, he
purchased the furniture from Aba and resold it in Maiduguri, they were as good
as the imported ones, but far cheaper. Many people liked the furniture and the
patronage was high. He had orders from many customers, especially the
Leventis Stores, which mixed them with their imported stock. (Nwoye 2010).
Mike Adenuga Junior
This entrepreneur was born in 1953. He has business in various industries such
as banking, oil and telecommunications. He owns the Consolidated Oil
Company, which is the first indigenous company to strike crude in December
1991. Consolidated Oil Company is into crude oil drilling, refining and marketing.
He also owns the Equatorial Trust Bank and created one of the main
telecommunications companies in Nigeria (Globacom), against all odds.
Globacom Limited was created after he failed to penetrate the
telecommunications industry in 1999 with his first telecommunications company-
Communications Investment Limited, (CIL) because his conditional license was
revoked. However, in 2002 he won the bid for the Second National Operator
(SNO) license. This was a better strategic business option for him because the
SNO has a wider range of operations and this gave Globacom the right to serve
as international gateway for telecommunications in Nigeria and also operate:
digital mobile lines, fixed wireless access phones and also operate as a national
carrier. This entrepreneur was able to achieve these entrepreneurial successes
49
because he has a unique flair for risks and tenacity of purpose
(Africansuccess.org, 2010; Nairaland.com, 2010).
Obateru Akinruntan
This entrepreneur comes from the Royal family in Ondo State, Nigeria. He is a
king in Yoruba land i.e. an Oba hence he has the appellate HRH (i.e. His Royal
Highness); and also a graduate of Business Administration from Lead City
University Ibadan. He created the Obat Oil and Petroleum Limited in 1981, a
company that is into the marketing of petroleum nation-wide, and has the largest
privately owned oil depot and jetty in Africa. His business interests have grown
steadily over the years to become the Obat Group which has interests in
petroleum, fishery, construction, tourism and hospitality, shipping, consultancy
services and water purification and production (Obateru, 2010; Nairaland.com,
2010).
Paul Okafor
This Nigerian entrepreneur established Elbe Pharma, an organization that deals
with the importation and marketing of pharmaceutical products such as Amalar
anti malaria tablets, Solotone multivitamin etc. nation-wide.
Razaq Okoya
This Nigerian entrepreneur created the Eleganza industries. An organization that
has contributed tremendously to national development through its assortment of
consumer products such as biros and coolers manufactured and marketed
nation-wide (Nairaland.com, 2010).
Uche Ohafia
This is another notable Nigerian entrepreneur in the shipping industry. He
created the Trans-Atlantic Shipping Agency Limited. The company is into air
freight, shipping line agency and charter services, import and export agency,
collateral management and warehousing services among others.
Cletus Olebune
This is a social entrepreneur who focuses on the development of tourism in
Africa. He created an enterprise that promotes tourism in Africa by informing the
world about events taking place in Africa. He has also used written
communication to educate and impart knowledge which will help Nigerians in the
different aspects of their lives and boost productive engagements thereby
improving Nigeria’s world ranking.
50
Durojaiye Isaac
He is the social entrepreneur with the slogan “Shit business is Good Business”.
In 1999, he established the DMT Mobile Toilets in Lagos. Prior to that period,
Lagos State did not have enough public toilets to cater for its teaming population.
In order to help solve the social problem created by this inadequate toilet facilities
in Lagos State, Durojaiye established the DMT Mobile Toilets, which is an
organization that manufactures, hires out and maintain moveable toilets in Lagos
State. Thereby promoting environmental sanitation and creating job opportunities
in Lagos State.
Gabriel Uriel Ogunjimi
This is a social entrepreneur in the area of information technology. He was
interested in promoting employment opportunities for Nigerians. To this effect, he
established the Landmark Internship International, organization that helps meet
Nigeria’s social and economic challenges by using the internet to network
globally with social enterprises in need of local talents.
Joachim Ezeji Ezeji
He contributed to the social development of Nigeria by helping in the
development of community water infrastructure across the country through
enhancing access to potable water in remote Nigerian communities. To achieve
this aim, in the year 2000 he established the Rural Africa Water Development
Project (RAWDP) which has tremendously assisted in improving the standard of
living of millions of Nigerians by giving them access to clean potable water.
Rochas Okorocha
This is a social entrepreneur interested in poverty alleviation of the less privileged
in the Nigerian society. To this effect, he founded the Rochas Foundation which
is concerned with helping Nigerian children to become self-sufficient thereby
breaking the cycle of poverty in the nation (Osalor, 2010).
Though as can be seen above we do have some entrepreneurs and social
entrepreneurs in Nigeria, they are still not adequate in number given its
population of over 150 million. Perhaps this underdevelopment of the
entrepreneurial class is responsible for the current status of the nation as a
developing nation. For instance, China and India that were previously in the
same developmental class as Nigeria are now developing rapidly following the
flourishing of their entrepreneurial class (Sogbesan, 2009). Recently, the
Nigerian government recognized the importance of entrepreneurship to national
development; this is because apart from creating employment, and producing
innovative goods and services, entrepreneurs and social entrepreneurs also
create wealth and generate social capital that is needed for national development
51
(Osalor, 2010). Consequently, the Nigerian government has taken steps to
encourage the development of entrepreneurship through the formulation of
various policies. This is why entrepreneurship as a course has been introduced
into the curriculum of all Nigerian universities.
The Nigerian Entrepreneur and Peculiarities of Nigerian Business Environment
Though, starting a small business in Nigeria is much the same as starting a
business in any other part of the world, the Nigerian entrepreneur, unlike other
entrepreneurs, faces some challenges that are peculiar only to businesses
established in Nigeria. This is because the Nigerian business environment is very
complex, uncertain and dynamic and as such, a lot of factors operate at cross
purposes in Nigeria. For example; many decisions that lack rationality are made
on a continuous basis; also various governmental and macroeconomic policies
which affect businesses are made and sometimes reversed instantly as was the
case in 1998 when the then Head of State General Abdul salaam Abubakar
increased workers’ salaries and reversed it again after a few months on the
ground that “he was ill advised”! Thus, to survive in the Nigerian business
environment, the Nigerian needs to identify and have a thorough understanding
of the mechanics, elements, dynamics, and functioning of the Nigerian business
environment. While bearing in mind that the Nigerian economy is primarily a
mixed economy. A mixed economy is midway between a free market economy
i.e. capitalist, and a pure planned economy i.e. socialist (Isimoya,1998; Dixon-
Ogbechi, 2003).
Also, given its large population, there is ample business opportunities for
entrepreneurs. A business opportunity exists when there are unmet needs
backed up with effective demand. Effective demand is demand that is backed-up
by purchasing power. That is, people have demands for a product and they are
ready/willing to part with their money (or other means of exchange) in exchange
for the product that can satisfy such needs and wants. Nigeria as a nation is
blessed with some of the factors of production. For instance Nigeria has plenty of
land, but has shortage of capital and skilled labor and high-level manpower while
it has a fairly adequate number of entrepreneurs. However, it lacks adequate
entrepreneurial ability because the quality of entrepreneurship that is still largely
low. Other peculiar problems faced by Nigerian entrepreneurs are: Financial
Problems, Infrastructural Problems, Low standard of Business Ethics and
Political Instability though the situation seems relatively stable since the advent of
the current democratic dispensation in 1999. Thus, in analyzing and scanning the
business environment for entrepreneurial opportunities, the Nigerian
entrepreneur has to bear in mind the peculiar problems in the Nigerian business
environment.
52
Discussion Forum
A brief has been given of some Nigerian Entrepreneurs. Choose two of the
entrepreneurs and do further studies on them or two other entrepreneurs in
Nigeria. Present your findings about them on:
1. Entrepreneurship type e.g. social entrepreneur
2. What motivated them into becoming an entrepreneur
3. Their challenges and success
4. The lesson you learned from their entrepreneurial life style
5. Read and comment on the posts of other two persons.
Self-Assessment Exercise
What skills would an entrepreneur need to acquire to succeed in his business?
Feedback
Going into business is a decision which one makes to passionately
undertake the setting up business concern, manage it, grow it, develop it
and diversify requires possession and mastery of certain skills.
The skills needed would include the following:
• Original or natural skills
• Technical skills
• Business skills
• Financial skills and of course
• Time management skills
• Menteeship skills
4.0 Conclusion
One way in which you can be motivated being an entrepreneur is to study
successful entrepreneurs to learn from their success and mistakes, and develop
self-model that will drive your business.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
53
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Africansuccess.org. (2008). “Biographical Data: Aliko Dangote”.
http://www.africansuccess.org /visuFiche.php?id=469&lang=en.
Africansuccess.org. (2010). “Biographical data: Mike Adenuga”.
http://www.africansuccess. org/visuFiche.php?id=793&lang=en.
African Venture (2003).
“Services”,http://www.africanventuresinc.com/services.htm.
Bizcovering.com (2010). “The History of Entrepreneurship in Nigeria”.
http://bizcovering. com/ history/the-history-of-entrepreneurship-in-
nigeria/#ixzz0yDNj4Pxl.
54
Unit 5 Barrier to Entrepreneurial Practice
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
In this unit, you will learn about challenges that may inhibit the success of an
entrepreneur.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to solve entrepreneurial challenges that
may affect the success of an entrepreneur.
3.0 Main Content
Entrepreneurship is the process of innovation and establishing new businesses
conditions in hazardous conditions through discovering opportunities and
utilization of resources. In other words, entrepreneurship means turning a new
idea into a product or service which consequently provides increasing
productivity, creating wealth, prosperity and employment. An entrepreneur is
someone who presents a new product or service to the market with a new idea
establishing a business mobilizing sources associating with financial, social and
honor risks (Ahmadpoor and Erfanian 2007). Today, all agree that there is a
positive relationship between entrepreneurship and economic growth (Benzing et
al. 2009; Valliere and Peterson 2009). Studies also show that.
Today entrepreneurship is considered as the economic driving engine for
developed and developing countries and most countries have invested
considerably on entrepreneurship development. The entrepreneurship
development in a community could provide sustainable employment and
economic development. It should be noted that entrepreneurship development
has always been encountered different challenges and barriers. The present
article is aimed to detect and classify the barriers of entrepreneurship
development in SMEs and determine the importance of each barrier.
55
Lack of supportive governmental regulations
This serve as a barrier to entrepreneurship. A number of African nations lack rule
of law. They have poorly defined property laws, enforce regulations
inconsistently, and allow widespread corruption and bribing. What measures can
be taken to overcome this huddle? This administrative barrier is not easy to
overcome, however, consulting your industry chambers and associations will
help. Cooperatives and advocacy groups can fight against such predatory
behaviour. Entrepreneurs should be vocal about favourable policing and
regulations.
Shortage of funds and resources
Money to start up an enterprise is another leading barrier to entrepreneurship.
Without funds, any person cannot begin to organise, train, develop and sell
product. How can one overcome financial barriers? It is very important that you
do not see money as the fundamental element to make or break your business. It
is true that money is important, but if you put it in front of your projects they will
never take off, and you will end up putting aside other key elements. If you start a
business online, you will be reaping the benefits of Internet and investment costs
are lower.
Employee related difficulties
Entrepreneurs must find and select the best-qualified employees who are
motivated and willing to grow with the venture. Then they must ensure the
employees do not leave. Practically this task becomes a barrier when employees’
expectations increases, governmental regulations related to labour employment
is hardened, and employee costs grow. Employee cost is more than pay. It
includes healthcare, workers’ compensation, social security tax, and health and
safety regulations. What’s the way forward? The finances of your business
should be audited consistently and thoroughly also scaling down operations and
overhead costs so that you will sustain profits and payments. Ensure that your
business is authorised to function, has all the permits, pays all the taxes and
compensations.
Severe market entry regulations
Taxation, environmental regulations, lending requirements, government rules and
licensing are all barriers to entrepreneurship. Most countries license market entry
and the creation of new firms to protect employees in certain industries and
professions. Entry procedures vary such that entrepreneurs need one day
to register an enterprise in one country and up to half a year in another. How do
you deal with this red tape scenario? Honestly, you have to wait and pull through.
56
Lack of entrepreneurship opportunities
Business creation needs existing marketplace opportunities with possibilities
known to the entrepreneur and favorable odds for success for entrepreneurial
“spirit” to succeed. How do you start? Try to figure out new and hidden
opportunities. A market opportunity for entrepreneurs should always be unique, a
gap and should be serviced with ideal quality in form of products or services.
Learn and acquire or pull yourself until you have the entrepreneurial capacity.
Entrepreneurial capacity is the existence of entrepreneurship qualities,
willingness and motivation to initiate new ventures.
Perception of society
Perception of society towards failure. Our society tends to reject and judge failure
and a mistake, keeping us in a mindset of going through life trying to avoid
mistakes without realising that failure is part of success. How to overcome
cultural barriers? This obstacle is mostly in your head. To overcome it you need
to change your thinking and your attitude towards life. Entrepreneurship is about
attitude, to see life in a different way and be willing to fight tirelessly to achieve
our goals.
Educational barriers
Entrepreneurs must develop skills related to leadership, teamwork, negotiation
and communication. There are things you learn in school, yet many of these
skills must be acquired by taking risks and throwing caution to the win, venturing
into the unknown. How to overcome educational hurdles? It is important to begin
to identify skills you need to run your company. Many of the qualities of an
entrepreneur can only be learned through experience, start your project and start
learning along the way.
Lack of adequate entrepreneurship training
Training and education can be a biggest advantage for new ventures. This
includes training in technical skills, managerial skills, entrepreneurial skills
and entrepreneurship. In Africa, are they adequate? Surely they are not. Join
cooperatives, learn from other players in your industry and acquire free
knowledge through banks and nongovernmental organisations.
Lack of industry experience
Rushing into a new market because it looks attractive and rewarding without
having some experience and background in it can be fatal. The heart of
leadership is learning first and doing before leading. Experience in a related
business before startup is positively associated to success. You can work freely
for big businesses that are into your chosen industry so that you acquire
57
knowledge and experience. There is no harm in learning so that you follow your
passion and succeed.
Disgust for risk
A psychological barrier closely related to the fear of failure is aversion to risk.
Entrepreneurs must take initiative, create structure with a social-economic
mechanism and accept risk of failure. So what should you do? Entrepreneurs
have to be risk takers while those who are risk averse will seek the security if an
existing establishment. Entrepreneurs have to decide whether to take action so
they don’t miss the boat. Just be aggressive as a business person and take the
risk. Big risk means big chances of making it.
Some countries do provide more support than others, but you can’t mourn about
the circumstances in your country because it will not get you anywhere. Find a
way to fight. That’s the spirit of entrepreneurship. Share your views on the
barriers of entrepreneurship in your country.
Analyzing detected barriers in the present discussion, show that lack of sufficient
knowledge in management skills, business management, lack of adequate
investment to start and retain a business, difficulty in finding information about
markets, products and prices, troublesome rules obtaining bank loans, and the
difficulty in recruiting good and reliable staff are the most important barriers and
challenges of corporate entrepreneurship development
Many governments who understand that entrepreneurship plays a significant role
in economic development especially in creating job opportunities, maximize the
utilization of facilities and research achievements, try to encourage and direct
entrepreneurs as much as they can toward entrepreneurship activities, due to the
special role of entrepreneurs in economic development. Entrepreneurs with their
skill in spotting opportunities and chances and develop these situations, are
considered as real pioneers of changes in economy and social developments
(Ghavami and Lotfalipoor 2008). The entrepreneurs are playing significant role in
forming SMEs of which have allocated considerable volume of economic deals
and workforce. In recent conditions which creating job opportunities for mass
unemployed especially graduate unemployed is one the major concerns of our
country’s policy makers and decision makers, entrepreneurship development in
SMEs could be the solution to many problems. Entrepreneurship development is
difficult and requires numerous studies and examinations. One of the most
important steps in the development of entrepreneurship is to identify the barriers
the entrepreneurs encountered. Identification and assessment of these barriers
can be used as a guide to be used in making strategic and entrepreneurial
background to provide further flourish. Accordingly this study module aims to
identify the barriers to entrepreneurship in small and medium enterprises and
further evaluate them.
58
Barriers facing entrepreneurial development in developing countries are often
similar. Most entrepreneurs in developing countries face an unstable business
environment and the bureaucratic rules of private firms, especially business
registration and taxation systems, are complicated (Benzing et al. 2009).
According to a study by Lamei (2002), rules and regulations set by the
government in the economy, not only do not provide grounds for entrepreneurial
and production activities, but also they act as a barrier to the growth of
entrepreneurship in small industries. The study shows that the legal barriers to
entrepreneurship development in five areas of starting a business, business law,
bank credit, import and export regulations, taxes and duties associated with the
weakness of the state in ensuring the ownership right, stabilization of
macroeconomic has pulled down the growth of entrepreneurship in small
industries. A study by Benzing et al. (2009) showed complex tax structure,
inability to find and hire a trustworthy and reliable staff, lack of familiarity with
accounting concepts and a weak economy are the most important barriers for the
entrepreneurs in Turkey. Zhuplev and Shtykhno (2009) studied the barriers of
entrepreneurs of Russian small businesses. Their results showed that insufficient
capital to start a business, lack of sufficient capital to continue a inability to find
and hire a reliable and trusted staff, and governmental laws and regulations are
considered the most important barriers to entrepreneurship.
Studies show that the barriers facing entrepreneurs in developing economies are:
weak economy, limited access to financial capital, inability to find and hire a
reliable and trusted staff, and tight competition (Benzing et al. 2005; Chu et al.
2007). Cook (2001) also stated that the owners of SMEs in developing
economies often complain of insufficient funds. Ozsoy et al. (2001) also reported
that obtaining loans from public and private organizations is another problem for
entrepreneurs in Turkey. Business owners often must rely on the financial needs
of personal and family resources. Kozan et al. (2006) also reported that
insufficient funds to significantly inhibit the growth of businesses in Turkey.
Another problem facing entrepreneurs in developing countries is the excessive
regulations which often lead to long delays and costly processes (Macculloch
2001). Hossein (1998) has reported entrepreneurship development limitations in
Bangladesh small industries as governmental costs, trade policies, legal and
administrative problems and financial constraints. In a study at Metropolish, the
most important barriers affecting entrepreneurial behaviour among individuals
are financial and economic barriers, lack of consultation and other intellectual
helps, high risk, lack of confidence in their abilities, lack of entrepreneurial skills,
having a good entrepreneurial ideas and lack of sufficient knowledge of the local
market and lack of motivation (Robertson et al. 2003). In studies by Yusuf (1995)
on the Pacific islanders, good management skills, access to financing individual
characteristics and satisfactory support of government are the most important
factors for successful entrepreneurs. Similarly, a study by Pratt (2001) on Kenyan
entrepreneurs showed that access to capital, having business skills, previous
experiences and family support are the most important factors of entrepreneurial
success. Kozan et al. (2006) also reported that business and financial
59
management training significantly associated with the development plans of
owners of small and medium enterprises. In particular, the Turkish entrepreneurs’
growth needed market information, technical assistance, financing, marketing
and financial education.
In general terms:
SECONDARY BARRIERS ON dary
No. MAIN BARRIERS Barriers
Financial barriers Insufficient capital to start and sustain
a business
2 High cost of advertisement services
3 Difficulty in finding adequate office
and operational space
4 Difficulty in recruiting good and
reliable staff
5 Lack of hardware and software 6
Difficulty in providing security
guarantees to launch an
entrepreneurial activity
Scientific/educational barriers 1.Lack of skills and knowledge required
to launch and sustain a business 8
Lack of sufficient knowledge in
management skills and how to manage
business
9 Lack of marketing training
10 Lack of accounting training and
inexperience in financial planning
11 Lack of adequate knowledge of the
laws and regulations
12 Difficulty in finding information
about markets, products and prices
13 Little knowledge of the business
environment and the ruling
environmental factor
14 The lack of knowledge about how
to enter market and expand market
presence
15 Lack of knowledge of foreign
markets
16 Lack of education and extension
programs on how to export products.
17 .Lack of entrepreneurial skills
training
60
Policymaking barriers The high rates
19 Troublesome rules obtaining bank
loans
20 Restrictions on labor laws
21 Lack of support from banks and
financial institutions
22 Insecurity for investments
23 High price volatility
24 Weak insurance system
Cultural barriers
25 Relation-based distribution of
inputs and credits
26 Rule of brokers and intermediaries
27 Lack of moral and material support
from family
28 Negative attitudes towards risk
Source: International Journal of Academic Research in Economics and
Management Sciences July 2013, Vol. 2, No. 4
Although many factors as articulated above have always been major constraints
to business growth problems associated with small and medium businesses, very
little attention has been paid to entrepreneurship which is the underlying factor to
the development of business.
The failure of many businesses in Nigeria particularly the parastatal sector has
been generally attributed many factors such as management, political
interference and lack of entrepreneurial spirit. Entrepreneurship behaviour which
is associated with taking advantage of opportunities and taking risks is what
makes businesses grow fast and create abundant wealth. (Nwoye 2010)
4.0 Conclusion
The knowledge about the barriers that may be encountered in a business will
help you look for strategies to overcome such barriers in achieving desirable
results.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
61
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Ahmadpour, M. & Erfanian, A. (2007). The role of entrepreneurship in attain to
economic growth and development. Journal of economic policies. Vol 69,pp.
1-19.
(PDF) Entrepreneurship Development Solutions from the Viewpoint of
Agricultural Production Cooperatives Managers of Hamadan Province. Available
from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265382690_Entrepreneurship_Develop
ment_Solutions_from_the_Viewpoint_of_Agricultural_Production_Cooperatives_
Managers_of_Hamadan_Province [accessed Sep 07 2018].
Kozan, M.K., Oksoy, D. and Ozsoy, O. (2006). Growth Plans of Small Business
in Turkey: Individual and Environmental Influences. Journal of Small Business
Management, 4(11), 114-129. International Journal of Academic Research in
Economics and Management Sciences July 2013, Vol. 2, No. 4 ISSN:2226-3624
216 www.hrmars.com/journals
Pratt, V. (2001). Sharing Business Skills in Kenya. from http://www.cipe.org
62
Module 2 The Nigerian Entrepreneurial Environment
Unit 1 The Business External Environment
Unit 2 Identifying Business Opportunities and Threats
Unit 3 Strategies for Exploring Opportunities in the Environment
Unit 4 Approaches to Addressing Environmental Barriers
Unit 1 The Business External Environment
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Introductory Concepts
3.2 The Major Environmental Factors
3.2.1 Identifying Business Opportunities and Threats
3.2.2 Strategies for Exploiting Opportunities In the Environment
3.2.3 Approaches to Addressing Environmental Barriers
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
The success of a business is not only dependent on the entrepreneurial
characteristics and internal factors which may have to do with working
environment. External factor such as government policies, instability in economy
could have advert effect on a business. This unit will introduce you to such
external factors that could affect business.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Identify business external factors
• Interpret basic environmental business concepts
63
3.0 Main Content
3.1 Introductory Concepts
Concept of Environment
The concept ‘environment’ literally means the surroundings, internal,
intermediate and external objects, influences or circumstances under which
someone or something exists (Kazmi, 1999). The environment within which
something exists exhibits certain characteristics which have been identified by
Kazmi (1999) to be: complexity, dynamism, multifaceted and far-reaching impact.
These are apart from the simple and stable environmental conditions. The
business environment is simply the surroundings within which a business exists.
The environment of the business exhibits the following conditions and
characteristics. These are:
Stable Condition: This environment is highly predictable, thus permitting a great
deal of standardization (work process, skills and output) to take place within the
organization. Simple Condition: This environment is one where knowledge can
be broken down into easily comprehended components (Minzberg, 1979).
Dynamism: The business environment is not static. It is dynamic and as such
changes continuously. This is because of the interactions of the various factors
that make up the business environment. Complexity: The business environment
is not simple; it is complex by virtue of the various components that comprise it
and the interactions and interrelationships among these factors. Multifaceted:
The business environment is many-sided. It can be viewed from many angles by
the parties involved. Hence, an occurrence that is viewed as strength to an
organization may be perceived as a weakness by another. Far-reaching impact:
The happenings in the business environment can have enormous impact on the
organization. It could have the ripple effect. This is because the business
environment can be conceived as a system, specifically an open system made
up of different components that interact and interrelate with one another. Hence,
once there is a problem or development with one aspect/sector, it could have far-
reacing impact on the other aspects/sectors (Kazmi, 1999).
By virtue of the above characteristics, it is important for the entrepreneur to
monitor the business environment constantly. Thus, it is of fundamental
importance for the entrepreneur to monitor both the key macro-environmental
forces (demographic/economic, technological, political/legal and social/cultural)
and micro environmental forces (customers, competition, distribution channels,
and suppliers) that will affect their ability to earn profits in the market place
(Kotler, 1995). These macro environmental forces and micro-environmental
forces are the components of the business environment. Why is business
environment important to an entrepreneurs?  It is important because it
determines the success or otherwise of their venture. Also it is within the
environment discover opportunities. Threats to the business success are equally
64
found within the environment. It is absolutely necessary for entrepreneurs to
understand the environment.
Components of the Business Environment – An overview
Scholars have classified the business environment using various basis or criteria.
This notwithstanding, it should be noted that the business environment is made
up of the internal and the external environment and the main macro-
environmental forces/factors found in the external environment and micro-
environmental forces/factors/ in the internal environment of the business. These
are discussed briefly in succeeding sections.
Internal Environmental Factors:
The internal environmental factors refer to those factors over which the
entrepreneur has control, at least in the short run; this is why it is also called the
controllable environment of the business. The internal environment of the
business is made up of all those physical and socials factors within the
boundaries of the business, which impart strengths or cause weaknesses of a
strategic nature and are taken directly into consideration in the decision-making
behaviour of the business. Strengths are inherent capacities, which a business
can use to gain strategic advantage over its competitors; they are the internal
strong points of the business such as: its core skills, competencies and expertise.
While weaknesses are inherent limitations or constraints, which create strategic
disadvantages, they are the internal factors that are lacking in the business. A
successful entrepreneur will find ways of overcoming the weaknesses and
convert them into strengths (Ifechukwu, 1986; Kazmi, 1999; Business-Plan,
2010). The internal environment of the business is made up of micro-
environmental factors such as: organizational goals and objectives, specific
technologies utilized by component units of the organization, the size, types and
quality of personnel, its administrative units, and the nature of the organization’s
product/service (Ifechukwu, 1986). The nature of a business’ internal
environment is also determined by the organizational resources, organizational
behaviour, strengths, weaknesses, synergistic relationships and distinctive
competence (Kazmi, 1999). Kazmi’s (1999) views Organizational resources as
the physical and human resources used as inputs in the organization to create
outputs. Organizational behaviour is the manifestation of the various forces and
influences operating in the internal environment of an organization. Strengths
are inherent capabilities that give strategic advantage. Distinctive competence:
The specific ability possessed by a particular organization that distinguishes it
from others. Organizational capability: This is the inherent capacity or ability of
an organization to use its strengths, and overcome its weaknesses in order to
exploit opportunities and face threats in its external environment.
Intermediate Environmental Factors Intermediate determinants of
entrepreneurship ideally represent issues or factors in the borderlines between
65
strictly internal and external factors affecting entrepreneurship. Generally they
include the customers and the suppliers who are the links between the
organization and the purely external environmental factors. They also include
various support systems, both private and public e.g. legal firms and public
relations agencies. Some of such support systems include: The National
Directorate of Employment (NDE): This was established by the Federal
Government of Nigeria in November, 1986. It was designed to work out
strategies for dealing with mass unemployment in the country especially among
the school leavers and college graduates. The mandate given to NDE is
executed within the framework of four core programs. These are:  The Small-
Scale Industries and Graduate Employment and Vocational Skills Development.
 Support for Agricultural Programs.  National Youth Employment and
Vocational Skills Development and  Special Public Works Programmes. NDE
executes its programs by providing financial support and training and
development for existing entrepreneurs and new entrants into entrepreneurship
(Ogundele, 2007). Some Financial Support Systems: These include:  Small
Industries Credit Committee.  National Economic Reconstruction Fund.  Small
and Medium Enterprises Loans Scheme.  Micro Finance Banks.  Nigerian
Industrial Development Bank.  Extension Services Units: The Federal
Government in 1964 established Industrial Development Centres (ADC) located
in Oshogbo, Owerri and Zaria. They were to provide extension services to small
and medium scale enterprises in terms of technical appraisal of loans application,
managerial assistance, product development and production planning and
control. Later more were created to have IDC in each state of the Federation.
Technical and Technological Related Support Systems: These include:  The
Federal Institute of Industrial Research, Oshodi (FIRO).  Project Development
Institute (PRODA) in Enugu.  Rural Agro-Industrial Development Council (Raw
Material Research and Development Council) etc. These were established to
provide technical and technology related support for Nigerian entrepreneurs.
These support systems as intermediate factor have closer links with the
entrepreneurs to facilitate their operations in various ways.
External Environmental Factors:
The external environmental factors refer to those factors over which the
entrepreneur has no control but have tremendous impact on the survival of the
business; this is why it is also called the uncontrollable environment of the
business. Within the external environment of the business are all the factors
which provide opportunities or pose threats to it. Opportunities are favourable
conditions in the business’ environment, which enable it to consolidate and
strengthen its position. They are the likely benefits to the business resulting from
changes in the external environment while threats are unfavorable conditions in
the business’ environment, which create a risk for, or cause damage to, the
business; they are the possible pitfalls or dangers resulting from changes in the
external environment. A successful entrepreneur will grab opportunities as they
66
emerge and avoid threats or even look for ways of converting threats into
opportunities (Kazmi, 1999; Business-Plan, 2010).
3.2 The Major Environmental Factors
Demographic factors:
These include the market i.e. consumer populations. It deals with their
composition in terms of sex, age, income, marital status, educational levels etc.
Political/Legal Factors:
This is made up of laws, government agencies and pressure groups that affect
the business. Technological Factors: This deals with knowledge of how to
accomplish tasks and goals, and innovations (Herbert, 1973).
Natural Environment:
This deals with all the gifts of nature or natural resources of the nation that serve
as input for the business. Socio-Cultural Factors: These deal with the people,
their norms, values and beliefs as they affect the business.
Economic Factors:
These deal with the Macro level factors relating to means of production and
wealth distribution. It also includes the forces of supply and demand, buying
power, willingness to spend, consumer expenditure levels, and the intensity of
competitive behaviour.
Competitive Environment:
These are those firms that market products that are similar to, or can be
substituted for, a business’ product(s) in the same geographical area.
The four general types of competitive structure are monopoly, oligopoly,
monopolistic competition, and perfect competition.
Other Factors:
The other factors making up the external business environment are:
1. Suppliers, which are other firms and individuals that provide the input
resources needed by the organization to produce goods and/or services.
2. Intermediaries, who are independent businesses that perform all the
activities necessary to direct the flow of goods and services from
manufacturers/marketers to ultimate consumers/customers. They include
wholesalers, retailers, agents and distributors, and;
3. Customers who constitute a portion of the target market of the business;
they are the ones the business strives to satisfy.
67
Self-Assessment Exercise
In your jotter, explain the internal and external environmental variables of an
entrepreneur. What are the likely challenges an entrepreneur will face from
these environmental factors. Compare your answer with the feedback.
Feedback
Internal Environmental Variables Generally, the internal environmental factors that
affect the nature and operation of business are manageable, controllable and
monitorable environmental variables. They include the following:
i. The Structure of the Industry This entails the key players, nature of the
market i.e. monopoly, oligopoly, duopoly, monophony and perfect competition.
ii. Sources of Supplies This contains the various sources of supplies, how
reliable are the sources, what are the terms and conditions between supplies
and the organization?
iii. Company’s Culture This spells out the methods and ways things are done,
rules and regulations, discipline, procedures and processes, organizational
structure, company trust, belief and norms as well as union activities and
pattern.
iv. Nature of Customers This includes how sophisticated are they, the
purchasing decision process, how regular and reliable are the customers and
the level of customer loyalty?
External Environmental Variables These are factors that are very difficult to
influence, control, manage but can be exploited. They normally pose a threat to
business existence. As a business manager in this present epoch, you must be
aware of them. They are as follows:
i. Political/Legal Factors. Here the manager will concern himself with the
elements such as the type of political system, political ideological
inclination and philosophical convictions, the legal provisions relating to
business operations in terms of registration, tax, licensing, standards and
quality requirements, stability of government and democracy as well as
nature of economic system.
ii. Economic Factors. These factors may include among others; the general
price level. Macroeconomic policies of the government, Gross Domestic
Product level and inflation, interest and tax rates, availability of raw
material, etc. exchange rate, balance of payment, and balance of trade
conditions.
iii. Social. This factor includes the following: General social settings, religious
inclination, beliefs, values, norms and attitude of people in general, family
and community structure.
iv. Geographical Factor This entails climatic conditions of business areas i.e.
temperature, weather, season etc. availability of and distribution of natural
resources – raw materials, topography and landscape, deserts, rainforest
or glacial, ecology, animals and forests reserves, population size and
structure, demographic characteristics in terms of sex, age, income,
health, education etc.
v. Technological Factor. This encompasses level of technical know-how,
68
4.0 Conclusion
Negligence to business environmental factors can lead to business failure. It is
mandatory for an entrepreneur to understand the different environmental factors
surrounding his/her business to avoid failure.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Business-Plan (2010). ”SWOT Analysis”.
http://www.businessplan.co.za/swotanalyse.html.
https://covenantuniversity.edu.ng/.../Environmental-Factors-and-
Entrepreneurship-De
https://www.vanguardngr.com/.../entrepreneurship-nigeria-and-its-operating-
environ.
69
Unit 2 Identifying Business Opportunities and Threats
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Before going into a business it is good to study your environment to know your
area of comparative advantage, the opportunities you are likely to enjoy and your
weakness you need to improve on in order to be able to compete comparatively
with your counterparts. Read more in the main content.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to apply SWOT analysis in developing a
business plan.
3.0 Main Content
Overview of SWOT Analysis SWOT entails the objective analysis of a business’s
Strengths and Weaknesses and its Opportunities and Threats. In order to identify
its strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats, an organization has to carry
out internal and external evaluation and also opportunities/threats analysis and
strengths/weaknesses analysis.
The Internal Evaluation starts with: The identification of the profit contribution of
each area, followed by allocation of resource, determination of risks involved,
variety reduction, realistic allocation of costs and the assessment of company
resources. External evaluation starts with the determination of market stranding,
determination of competitors’ strengths and weaknesses, assessment of the
vulnerability of the business’ main products to substitutes, assessment of the
effects of economic changes on the business, inter firm comparisons and Stock
Market Valuation in terms of an assessment of the company’s vulnerability to
takeover (Dixon-Ogbechi, 2003).
Strengths/Weaknesses Analysis. This involves scanning the internal
environment of the business in order to identify its strengths and weaknesses.
The entrepreneur needs to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the
business periodically. Also, the entrepreneur can assess the internal
environment of the business by critically looking at the internal factors in terms of
70
the 5s, namely: Skills, Strategy, Staff, Structure, Systems and Shared Values
(Dibb, Simkin, Pride, & Ferrell, 1991; Aluko, Odugbesan, Gbadamosi &
Osuagwu, 1998; Business-Plan, 2010). To do this effectively the entrepreneur
needs to ask him/herself and answer questions pertaining to the 5s (five ‘s’) in
terms of their strengths and weaknesses by developing questionnaires to ask
questions pertaining to major internal environmental factors such as: Skills:
What skills do the organizational members possess? What are the distinctive
competencies of the organization? Strategy: Does your business have a clear
vision and mission? Are your business objectives/goals derived from its mission?
Does your business have plans? Do you follow the laid down plans of the
business as scheduled? Does your business have clear strategies to
operationalise its policies? What skills do the organizational members possess?
What are the distinctive competencies of the organization? Staff: Does the
business have qualified staff for the relevant positions? Are the staff rightly
placed? Does the business have adequate number of personnel to man the
various positions? Structure: Does the business have an organizational structure
or organogram? What type of organization structure does your business adopt?
Are there clear lines of reporting and communication? Systems: Does your
organization have a system? What kind of systems (e.g. MIS, Accounting,
Quality Control, and Inventory) does your business have in place? (Business-
Plan, 2010).
If the answers to these questions are positive/or the factors are present, then you
record them as strengths and if the answers are negative/ the factors are absent,
then you record them as weaknesses. After this, each factor is rated as to
whether it is a major strength, minor strength, neutral factor, minor weakness, or
major weakness (Business-Plan, 2010).
Opportunities and Threats Analysis This involves scanning the external
environment of the business in order to identify the Opportunities and Threats.
The entrepreneur can assess the external environment of the business by
critically looking at the opportunities and threats emanating from changes in the
major external environmental factors. For instance opportunities in the
technological environment could be availability of advanced technology,
developments in Information Technology like the advent of the GSM;
opportunities in the Political/Legal environment could be favourable government
policies, tax holidays; opportunity in the Demographic environment could be
great market demand; opportunities in the Economic environment could be
growing export market increased consumer spending and growing industry.
Positive seasonal influences are an opportunity in the natural environment;
opportunities in the other environment could be change in consumers taste in
favour of your product and Intermediaries’ cooperation. Examples of threats in
some external environmental factors can come from direct competitors, indirect
competitors, consumers, substitute products or services and suppliers,
71
customers brand switching and innovations by competitors (Dixon Ogbechi,
2003; Business-Plan, 2010).
The entrepreneur can classify the overall attractiveness of a business once
he/she has conducted a thorough opportunities and threats analysis. To this
effect, threats could be classified according to their seriousness and probability of
occurrence. To evaluate its opportunities, the business needs to operate a
reliable Management Information System (MIS). The information obtained will
enable the entrepreneur know if the business is ideal (i.e. it is high in major
opportunities and low in major threats); is speculative (i.e. it is high in both major
opportunities and threats); mature business (i.e. it is low in major opportunities
and threats) and troubled (i.e. it is low in opportunities and high in threats). An
effective opportunity and threat analysis is advantageous to the entrepreneur; it
will enable the entrepreneur make decisions on whether the business should limit
itself to those opportunities where it now possesses the required strengths or
should consider better opportunities where it might have to acquire or develop
certain strengths (Dibb et al., 1991; Aluko et al, 1998; Dixon-Ogbechi, 2003;
Business-Plan, 2010).
The entrepreneur can classify the overall attractiveness of a business once
he/she has conducted a thorough opportunities and threats analysis. To this
effect, threats could be classified according to their seriousness and probability of
occurrence. To evaluate its opportunities, the business needs to operate a
reliable Management Information System (MIS). The information obtained will
enable the entrepreneur know if the business is ideal (i.e. it is high in major
opportunities and low in major threats); is speculative (i.e. it is high in both major
opportunities and threats); mature business (i.e. it is low in major opportunities
and threats) and troubled (i.e. it is low in opportunities and high in threats). An
effective opportunity and threat analysis is advantageous to the entrepreneur; it
will enable the entrepreneur make decisions on whether the business should limit
itself to those opportunities where it now possesses the required strengths or
should consider better opportunities where it might have to acquire or develop
certain strengths (Dibb et al., 1991; Aluko et al, 1998; Dixon-Ogbechi, 2003;
Business-Plan, 2010).
This unit looked at how the entrepreneur can analyze and scan the environment
for entrepreneurial opportunities. In doing this, the reductionist approach has
been adopted. To this effect, an overview of the concept of business,
environment, business environment, business environmental factors was
discussed. The study session also discusses the SWOT (Strengths,
Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) analysis and sees how this could assist
the entrepreneur evaluate the attractiveness of a business. Apart from this the
SWOT framework is beneficial for entrepreneurial decision making because it
enables the entrepreneur respond to the dynamic business environment by
enabling him consolidate on the strengths, overcome or turn weaknesses
72
around, grab opportunities and avoid threats or even convert threats to
opportunities (Business-Plan, 2010).
Discussion Forum
In your context, identify the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats,
that are likely to affect young Entrepreneur? Among the posts, identify two that
share the same view with you.
4.0 Conclusion
In planning your business, apply the SWOT analysis. Look at your strength.
This is what will keep you in the business so you must always look for ways to
protect it. Do not neglect your weakness. This could kick you out of business.
So you must identify ways of improving the identified weakness. Identify the
external opportunities to strengthen your business and neglect treat. This is
external. Although, there are so many other models that can be used in planning
a business the SWOT is simple to use.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
Business-Plan (2010). SWOT analysis”.
http://www.businessplan.co.za/swotanalyse.html
https://articles.bplans.com/swot-analysis-challenge-day-3-identify-opportunities
73
Unit 3 Strategies for exploring opportunities in the Environment
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
To know the opportunities out there is often difficult especially for young
entrepreneur. In this unit you will learn how such opportunities can be identified.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to demonstrate the skills in searching for
opportunities for identified business.
3.0 Main Content
Opportunity exploitation refers to activities conducted in order to gain economic
returns from the discovery of a potential entrepreneurial opportunity. It involves
the decision to act upon a perceived opportunity and the associated behaviours
aimed at realizing the value of the opportunity.
What do entrepreneurial opportunities look like? How do firms discover and
exploit these opportunities to create value and sustain competitive advantage?
This paper reviews the strategic management and entrepreneurship literatures to
identify the nature and character of entrepreneurial opportunities and the
entrepreneurial strategies that firms employ to seize and commercialize these
opportunities. Three emerging schools are identified. The economic school
argues that entrepreneurial opportunities exist as a result of the distribution of
information about material resources in society. The cultural cognitive school
argues that entrepreneurial opportunities exist as a result of environmental
ambiguity and the cultural resources available to interpret and define these
opportunities. Finally, the sociopolitical school stresses the role of network and
political structures in defining entrepreneurial opportunities. We integrate these
perspectives to offer a way to improve understanding of the opportunity creation
and exploitation process.
74
Four ways to identify more business opportunities.
1. Listen to your potential clients and past leads. When you're targeting
potential customers listen to their needs, wants, challenges and
frustrations with your industry. ...
2. Listen to your customers. ...
3. Look at your competitors. ...
4. Look at industry trends and insights.
Exploit new business opportunities
Once you have identified new business opportunities, narrow the list down to
those customers that you think are potentially the most lucrative. Using a
more targeted approach will prevent you spreading your marketing budget and
time too thinly. Any business opportunities you identify need to be managed.
Carefully examine the action you plan to take - you need to make sure the
opportunities fit in with your business objectives.
Be careful that you don't develop the business beyond your means - make sure
that your capabilities match the opportunity. There is no point securing too much
new business if you can't then successfully deliver your promises.
Planning is essential to all businesses during their entire lifespan. It focuses on
defining business goals for the future and determining steps, activities and
resources needed to achieve them.
Successful businesses regularly review their business plan to ensure that it
continues to meet their needs and responds to any internal and external
changes. This guide explains how you can turn your business plan from a static,
'one-off' document into a dynamic template that will help your business both
survive and thrive. It describes the benefits of ongoing business planning and the
importance of writing clear business growth plans. It also explains how to use a
business plan to allocate resources effectively and tells you why you should carry
out regular business plan reviews.
Take advantage of new opportunities
Monitor your competitors. Identify areas they don't operate in and find out who
they sell to - these are potential customers for your business as well.
Examine their product range or the services they offer, check out their marketing
and investigate their pricing. A competitor's poor performance could create an
opportunity for your product or service.
Look for events or changes that could trigger a need for a new type of product
or service, for example:
75
• new legislation can create opportunities for business consultants or
advisers
• two organizations may be merging - providing a great deal of opportunity
for all types of services and trades.
Look beyond your current market.
Looking further than your sector or established market can open up business
opportunities. By looking to other sectors, businesses and countries for
inspiration and ideas you can combine existing ideas to produce a more effective
product or service and take a fresh approach to meeting an identified need.
Consider working in partnership with other businesses that offer complementary
services to yours and which are aimed at similar customer groups. The number
of potential opportunities could be increased in this way by:
• the partner business selling your products or services to customers who
don't currently buy from you
• you selling your partners' products or services
• jointly developing new products or services based on a combination of
your business and theirs
You will have to agree fixed fees or commission rates with the other business if
you are selling each other's products or services. A further benefit of working in
partnership is that marketing and promotional costs are shared (equally or
proportionately). Pooling your resources can also increase your bargaining
power, enabling you to negotiate better deals with suppliers.
4.0 Conclusion
Identify your competitors, study their market trend and identify gaps. Take
advantage of the gap to improve your techniques. Search for support and
collaborations in your line of business with those who are interested in your line
of business.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
76
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
https://www.smstudy.com/article/exploring-opportunities-and-threats
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/65210
77
Unit 4 Approaches to addressing environmental barriers
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
In every face of life, there are challenges. This is not different in business. You
do not quit a business because there are challenges. Rather you look for ways
such challenges can be surmounted. You are going to learn strategies you can
use in solving environmental barriers in business.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to solve basic environmental barriers in
business.
3.0 Main Content
Five kinds of Environmental Barriers
People with disabilities can face many Environmental Barriers. These barriers
depend on the person, the type of the disability, and many other things. There
are five broad types of barriers:
1. Physical barriers: Is your home accessible? Does it let you move around
easily? How accessible is work or school, and the public places you go?
Physical barriers can be caused by things like buildings, stairs or hills,
doorways, or even the weather and climate.
2. Attitude barriers: These have to do with prejudice and discrimination. Do
negative attitudes and prejudice from people you come in contact with
keep you from being as productive and successful as possible?
3. Assistance barriers: Does lack of transportation keep you from going
where you need to go? Does a lack of good information or medical care
keep you from doing what you need to do? Are people in your home and
community helpful enough?
78
4. Policy barriers: Do government rules make road-blocks for you? Can you
find the educational, employment, and service programs you need? Do
rules and regulations stop you or get in your way?
5. Work and School Barriers: Are people you interact with at school or
work positive and helpful? Do they support you? Does how they act
prevent you from doing the things you need to do?
What Did We Learn?
We developed a survey that covered all of these barriers. It included several
specific examples of each of the five types -- 25 different barriers in all. Then, we
asked more than 70 adults with TBI who had their injury about a year ago to
complete the survey. Here is what we learned:
Most people with TBI aren’t very bothered a lot by barriers in the environment.
Those who do have barriers often fall into certain groups.
1. Women seem to say they face more barriers than men. However, men
reported more barriers that had to do with work.
2. People who were married when they were injured seemed to face more
environmental barriers than people who were not married.
3. People who are African-American or Hispanic reported more barriers than
white people. In fact, people who were in other minority groups also
reported more barriers. But, white people reported more of two particular
types of barriers: those that had to do with bad attitudes, and those
relating to lack of support from other people.
4. Physical barriers, like stairs, hills, roads, and buildings were more of a
problem for older people with TBI.
5. People who were working or in school before they were injured reported
that they had fewer barriers after injury.
6. People whose TBI causes them to need actual help from others are more
likely to report barriers. But, beyond this, the severity of the TBI didn’t
seem to affect the number of environmental barriers that people reported.
These were the biggest and most common barriers that people did report:
1. Not having the transportation they need
2. Barriers in their surroundings – like poor lighting, too much noise, crowds.
It also includes things in nature like cold temperatures, too much rain,
steep hills, etc.
79
3. The attitudes of people in their own homes or families
Barriers affected people with TBI in several ways
1. People who said they had a lot of barriers were less satisfied with their
lives.
2. People had trouble getting out of their houses and moving around their
communities also said they had more barriers in their environment.
3. People who reported experiencing negative attitudes or prejudice were
less independent and less active in outside activities.
4. People who did not work or go to school reported more barriers. In other
words, people who were not doing something “productive” also thought
they had more barriers.
What does this mean to you?
Keep in mind that, in spite of the research we described here, the majority of
people with TBI in our we study did not report that environmental barriers are a
big problem for them. That means that it is very likely that you don’t have a lot of
trouble with barriers either. If that is the case, then think of this brochure as just
“food for thought.”
However, if you are dealing with barriers in the environment, you need to think
about whether they are making a difference in your life. Here is a modified
version of the survey we used in our research:
Check the barriers that are big problems for you: ones that you experience often,
or ones that are severe problems:
• The availability of transportation
• Design and layout of your home
• Design and layout of buildings and places you use at school or work
• Design and layout of buildings and places in your community
• The natural environment — temperature, terrain, and climate
• Aspects of your surroundings — lighting, noise, crowds, etc.
• The availability of information you want or need
• The availability of education and training you want or need
• The availability of health care services and medical care
• Lack of personal equipment or special adapted devices
• Lack of computer technology
• The availability of someone else to help you in your home
• The availability of someone else to help you at school or work
• The availability of someone else to help you in your community
80
• The attitudes of others in your home
• The attitudes of others at school or work
• The attitudes of others in your community
• Lack of support and encouragement from others in your home
• Lack of support and encouragement from others at school or work
• Lack of support and encouragement from others in your community
• Prejudice or discrimination
• Lack of program or services in your community
• Problems with rules and policies of businesses and organizations
• Problems with education and employment programs and policies
• Problems with government programs and policies
Now, go back and look at the ones you checked. Ask yourself: What can you
change to make these barriers be smaller or less frequent?
• Do the people around you know what kind of support you need from
them?
• Could you move to a different place that is more accessible?
• Could equipment like a cane or a wheelchair, or even a wheelchair lessen
your barriers?
• Could you find new people to be with -- ones who are more supportive and
positive?
• Can you change what you do so you are less bothered by your
environment? For, example, if noise bothers, could you avoid noisy
places?
• Can you change things about yourself so other people perceive you
differently? This could improve their attitudes. Check out our brochure on
Communicating for ideas.
4.0 Conclusion
In a business, identify the challenges and the causes. The causes give room in
identifying the best way to resolve such challenge(s)
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
81
6.0 References/Further Reading
Integrated approaches to address community & environmental barriers ...
www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/~/media/Files/Activity%20Files/.../Lambert.pdf
https://innovationpolicyplatform.org/content/addressing-environmental-challenges
82
Module 3 Creativity and Intellectual Rights
Unit 1 Intellectual Properties and its Dimensions
Unit 2 Copyright Laws in Nigeria
Unit 3 Strategies for Protection of Intellectual Property (Original Ideas,
Concepts, Products, etc.)
Unit 1 Intellectual Properties and its Dimensions
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Readings
1.0 Introduction
Entrepreneurs come up with great ideas that lead to creativity and innovation.
There are measures through which protection is given to the original owners of
idea creation. The type of protections will be discussed in this unit.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to describe the steps you will take to
protect your business idea.
3.0 Main Content
Creativity
The terms creativity and innovation are often used to mean the same thing, but
each has a unique connotation. Creativity is ‘’ the ability to bring something new
into existence. “This emphasizes the “ability,” not the “activity,” of bringing
something new into existence. A person may therefore conceive of something
new and envision how it will be useful, but not necessarily take the necessary
action to make it a reality. Innovation is the process of doing new things. It is the
conversion of creative ideas into market place reality, which people are prepared
to buy. This distinction is significant. Ideas have little value until they are
converted into new products, services, or processes. Innovation, therefore, is the
83
transformation of creative ideas into useful applications but creativity is
prerequisite to innovation (Holt, 1992).
Stages of creativity
According to Holt (1992), the creative process comprises the following five
stages as shown in figure 1:
1. Idea germination: Exactly how an idea is germinated is a mystery; it is not
something that can be examined under the microscope. For most
entrepreneurs, ideas begin with interest in a subject or curiosity about
finding a solution to a particular problem.
2. Preparation: Once a seed of curiosity has taken form as a focused idea,
creative people embark on a conscious search for answers. If it is a
problem they are trying to solve, then they begin an intellectual journey,
seeking information about the problem and how others have tried to
resolve it. Inventors will set up laboratory experiments, designers will begin
engineering new product ideas, and marketers will study consumer buying
behaviour.
3. Incubation: The idea, once seeded and given substance through
preparation, is put on a back burner, the subconscious mind is allowed time
to assimilate information. Incubation is a stage of ‘mulling it over’. When an
individual has consciously worked to resolve a problem without success,
allowing it to incubate in the subconscious will often lead to a resolution.
4. Illumination: Illumination occurs when the idea surfaces as a realistic
creation. This stage is critical for entrepreneurs because ideas, by
themselves, have little meaning. Reaching the illumination stage separates
daydreamers and tinkerers from creative people who find a way to
transmute values.
5. Verification: An idea once illuminated in the mind of an individual still has
little meaning until verified as realistic and useful. Thus, verification is the
development stage of refining knowledge into application.
According to Adams (2005), the following are critical to individual creativity: 1)
Knowledge: The T-shape mind with a breadth of understanding across multiple
disciplines and one or two areas of in-depth expertise. 2) Thinking: a strong
ability to generate novel ideas by combining previously disparate elements. This
‘synergistic’ thinking must be combined with analytical and practical thinking. 3)
Personal motivation: the appropriate levels of intrinsic motivation and passion for
one’s work combined with appropriate synergistic motivators and self-confidence.
4) Environment: a non-threatening, non-controlling climate conducive to idea
combination and recombination such as ‘intersection’. 5) An explicit decision to
84
be creative along with a meta-cognitive awareness of the creative process can
go a long way in enhancing long-term creative results.
What are the factors that encourage creativity  The factors are knowledge of
noble idea generation, thinking, personal motivation, environment and
determination to be unique.
Innovation
Innovation and its benefits Zimmerer, Scarborough, and Wilson (2008) define
innovation as the specific instrument of entrepreneurs, the means by which they
exploit change as an opportunity for a different business or a different service.
As a dimension of corporate entrepreneurship, innovation is a firm’s commitment
to creating and introducing products, production processes, and organisational
systems (Covin and Slevin, 1991; Lumpkin and Dess, 1996; Zahra, 1996).
Innovation is the process that provides added value and novelty to the firm and
its suppliers and customers through the development of new procedures,
solutions, products and services as well as new methods of commercialisation
(Shaw, O’Loughlin and McFadzean, 2005).
According to Knight (1997) and Kreiser, Marino and Weaver (2002) in Scheepers
(2007), innovativeness refers to the capability, capacity and willingness of an
enterprise to support creativity and experimentation to solve recurring customer
problems. Innovativeness entails creativity and experimentation that result in new
products, new services, or improved technological processes (Dess and
Lumpkin, 2005). It is arguably the most essential component of corporate
entrepreneurship (Fitzsimmons, Douglas, Antoncic, and Hisrich (2005).
Innovation is the outcome of the firm’s effective development and use of new
technologies and/or knowledge about market opportunities (Ireland, Hitt, Camp,
and Sexton, 2001).
For a firm to be innovative, it needs to have a free-wheeling, “boundary less”
brainstorming culture to engender creative ideas (Khandwalla and Mehta, 2004).
It also requires that organisations depart from existing technologies and practices
and venture beyond the current state (Dess and Lumpkin, 2005). Its attribute
describes a firm’s imperative to initiate newness with added value (Aloulou and
Fayolle, 2005).
Innovation can lead to competitive advantage and provide a basis for firm growth
(Hitt, Hoskisson, and Kim, 1997). Innovative firms develop strong, positive
market reputations. They engage in opportunity exploration which includes
behaviour such as looking for ways to improve current products, services or
processes, or trying to think about current work processes, products or services
in alternative ways (De Jong and Wennekers, 2008). Innovative firms also adapt
to market changes and exploit market or opportunity gaps. Sustained innovation
85
moreover distances entrepreneurial firms from their industry rivals, and thus
increases financial returns (Bhardwaj, Sushil and Momaya, 2007).
Forms of Innovations
According to Hamel (1997) in Dess and Lumpkin (2005), innovations come in
different forms: Technological innovativeness primarily comprises research and
engineering efforts aimed at developing new products and processes. Products-
market innovativeness consists of market research, products design, and
innovations in advertising and promotion. Administrative innovativeness is
concerned with novelty in management systems, control techniques, and
organisational structure. Innovation can also be classified in terms of whether
it is incremental, modular, architectural or radical (Henderson and Clark, 1990 in
Hager, 2006):
Incremental Innovation: This comprises relatively small modifications to pre-
existing solutions (Scheepers, 2007). In the view of Henderson and Clark (1990)
in Hager (2006), this type of innovation improves and extends an established
design. Improvement takes place in individual components, but the basic core
design concepts and the linkage between them remain the same. An example is
faster spinning hard drives.
Modular Innovation: This kind of innovation changes the core design of one or
more components but does not change the entire product architecture. This type
of innovation requires new knowledge for one or more components, but the
architectural knowledge remains the same. A good example is the digital phone
which replaced the analogue phone, without changing the phone itself
(Henderson and Clark, 1990 in Hager, 2006).
Architectural Innovation: The essence of this type of innovation is the
reconfiguration of an established system to link together components and parts in
a new way (Henderson and Clark, 1990 in Hager, 2006). According to the
authors, architectural innovation does not mean that the components remain
unchanged but they are changed in a manner that there are new ways of linkage
between the components. The change is so small that the core concept behind
the changed component is the same, and the associated scientific and
engineering knowledge remain the same. An example is the technologies where
architectural innovations reduced the size of the hard drives from 14-inches
diameter disks to diameter of 3.5-inches, and from 2.5-inches to 1.8-inches.
Radical Innovation: This type of innovation brings about a new dominant design
and consequently, a new set of core design concepts embodied in components
that are linked together in a new architecture (Hager, 2006). Radical innovation
leads to new solutions that address customer needs (Morris and Kuratko, 2002 in
Scheepers, 2007). In the view of O’Connor and Ayers (2005) in Lassen (2007),
radical innovation is the commercialisation of products or technologies that have
86
a strong impact on the market, in terms of offering wholly new benefits; and the
firms, in terms of generating new business. Moore (2004) also gives the following
taxonomy of innovation:
Disruptive Innovation: Gets a great deal of attention, particularly in the press,
because markets appear as if from nowhere, creating massive new sources of
wealth. It tends to have its roots in technological discontinuities, such as the one
that enabled Motorola’s rise to prominence with the first generation of cell
phones.
Application Innovation: Takes existing technologies into new markets to serve
new purposes.
Product Innovation: Takes established offers in established markets to the next
level, as when Intel releases a new processor or Toyota a new car. The focus
can be on performance increase, cost reduction, usability improvement or any
other product enhancement.
Process Innovation: Makes processes for established offers in established
markets more effective or efficient. Examples include Dell’s streamlining of its PC
supply chain and order fulfillment systems.
Experiential Innovation: Makes surface modifications that improve customer’s
experience of established products or processes. These can take the form of
delighters (“You’ve got mail!”), satisfiers (superior line management at
Disneyland), or reassures (package tracking from FedEx).
Marketing Innovation: Improves customer-touching processes be they
marketing communications or consumer transactions
Business Model Innovation: Reframes an established value proposition to the
customer or a company’s established role in the value chain or both. Examples
include IBM’s shift to on demand computing, and Apple’s expansion into
consumer retailing.
Structural Innovation: Capitalizes on disruption to restructure industry
relationships. Innovators like banks, for example, that have used the deregulation
of financial services to consumers under one umbrella.
Phases In Successful Innovation
Desouza, Dombrowski, Awazu, Baloh, Papagari, Kim, and Jha, (2007) identify
the following five essential phases of successful innovation:
Idea Generation and Mobilisation. This phase is the starting point for new
ideas. Successful idea generation should be stimulated by the pressure to
compete and by the freedom to explore. Once a new idea is generated, it is
87
conveyed to the mobilization phase, wherein the idea travels to a different
physical or logical location. Because most inventors are not also marketers, a
new idea often needs someone other than its originator to move it along. This
phase is crucially important to the progression of a new idea, and omitting it can
delay or even sabotage the innovation process (Desouza et al., 2007).
Advocacy and Screening. According to the authors, this phase is the period for
weighing an idea’s costs and benefits. Advocacy and screening have to take
place simultaneously to weed out ideas that lack potential without allowing
stakeholders to reject ideas impulsively solely on the basis of their novelty. Firms
will have more success when the evaluation process is transparent and
standardized, because employees feel more comfortable contributing when they
could anticipate how their ideas would be judged.
Experimentation. The experimentation phase assesses the sustainability of
ideas for a particular firm at a particular time – and in a particular environment. In
this phase, it is essential to determine who the customer will be and what he or
she will use the innovation for. With that in mind, the firm might discover that
although someone has a great idea, it is ahead of its time or just not right for a
particular market. However, it is important not to interpret these kinds of
discoveries as failures – they could actually be the catalysts of new and better
ideas (Desouza et al., (2007).
Commercialisation. In this phase, the firm should look to its customers to verify
that innovation actually solves their problems and then should analyze the costs
and benefits of rolling out the innovation. According to the Desouza et al (2007),
an invention is only considered an innovation once it has been commercialised.
Therefore, the commercialisation phase is a significant one similar to advocacy in
that it takes the right people to progress the idea to the next developmental
phase.
Diffusion and Implementation. According to the authors, diffusion is the
process of gaining final, company overall acceptance of an innovation.
Implementation is the process of setting up the structures, maintenance and
resources needed to produce it. According to Loewe and Dominiquini (2006),
good innovation processes share the following characteristics: Allow divergence
and exploration at the front end. This helps ensure that the new ideas generated
are not simply a repeat of what has been done before. Synthesize individual
ideas into bigger platforms before selecting individual ideas to develop further.
This enables the company to avoid "gambling the farm" on one idea without first
learning about the larger opportunities at hand.
How can one be innovative?
One can become innovative through continuous searching for better ways of
doing things, it is the attitude that challenge status quo.
88
Source: Holt (1992)
According to Holt (1992), the creative process comprises the following five
stages as shown below:
1. Idea germination
Exactly how an idea is germinated is a mystery; it is not something that can be
examined under the microscope. For most entrepreneurs, ideas begin with
interest in a subject or curiosity about finding a solution to a particular problem.
2. Preparation
Once a seed of curiosity has taken form as a focused idea, creative people
embark on a conscious search for answers. If it is a problem they are trying to
solve, then they begin an intellectual journey, seeking information about the
problem and how others have tried to resolve it. Inventors will set up laboratory
experiments, designers will begin engineering new product ideas, and marketers
will study consumer buying behaviour.
3. Incubation
The idea, once seeded and given substance through preparation, is put on a
back burner, the subconscious mind is allowed time to assimilate information.
Incubation is a stage of ‘mulling it over’. When an individual has consciously
worked to resolve a problem without success, allowing it to incubate in the
subconscious will often lead to a resolution.
4. Illumination
Illumination occurs when the idea surfaces as a realistic creation. This stage is
critical for entrepreneurs because ideas, by themselves, have little meaning.
Reaching the illumination stage separates daydreamers and tinkerers from
creative people who find a way to transmute values.
5. Verification
An idea once illuminated in the mind of an individual still has little meaning until
verified as realistic and useful. Thus, verification is the development stage of
refining knowledge into application.
According to Adams (2005), the following are critical to individual creativity: 1)
Knowledge: The T-shape mind with a breadth of understanding across multiple
disciplines and one or two areas of indepth expertise. 2) Thinking: a strong
ability to generate novel ideas by combining previously disparate elements. This
‘synergistic’ thinking must be combined with analytical and practical thinking. 3)
Personal motivation: the appropriate levels of intrinsic motivation and passion for
one’s work combined with appropriate synergistic motivators and self-confidence.
4) Environment: a non-threatening, non-controlling climate conducive to idea
combination and recombination such as ‘intersection’. 5) An explicit decision to
89
be creative along with a meta-cognitive awareness of the creative process can
go a long way in enhancing long-term creative results.
In summary:
Incubation: Subconscious assimilation of information fantasizing
Preparation: Conscious search for knowledge rationalization
Idea Germination: The seeding stage of a new idea recognition
Illumination: Recognition of idea as being feasible realization
Verification: Application or test to prove idea has value validation
Factors that encourage creativity
• Knowledge of noble idea generation
• Thinking,
• Personal motivation,
• Environment and
• Determination to be unique.
Innovation and its benefits
Zimmerer, Scarborough, and Wilson (2008) define innovation as the specific
instrument of entrepreneurs, the means by which they exploit change as an
opportunity for a different business or a different service. As a dimension of
corporate entrepreneurship, innovation is a firm’s commitment to creating and
introducing products, production processes, and organizational systems (Covin
and Slevin, 1991; Lumpkin and Dess, 1996; Zahra, 1996). Innovation is the
process that provides added value and novelty to the firm and its suppliers and
customers through the development of new procedures, solutions, products and
services as well as new methods of commercialisation (Shaw, O’Loughlin and
McFadzean, 2005).
According to Knight (1997) and Kreiser, Marino and Weaver (2002) in Scheepers
(2007), innovativeness refers to the capability, capacity and willingness of an
enterprise to support creativity and experimentation to solve recurring customer
problems. Innovativeness entails creativity and experimentation that result in new
products, new services, or improved technological processes (Dess and
Lumpkin, 2005). It is arguably the most essential component of corporate
entrepreneurship (Fitzsimmons, Douglas, Antoncic, and Hisrich (2005).
Innovation is the outcome of the firm’s effective development and use of new
technologies and/or knowledge about market opportunities (Ireland, Hitt, Camp,
and Sexton, 2001).
For a firm to be innovative, it needs to have a free-wheeling, “boundary less”
brainstorming culture to engender creative ideas (Khandwalla and Mehta, 2004).
90
It also requires that organisations depart from existing technologies and practices
and venture beyond the current state (Dess and Lumpkin, 2005). Its attribute
describes a firm’s imperative to initiate newness with added value (Aloulou and
Fayolle, 2005).
Innovation can lead to competitive advantage and provide a basis for firm growth
(Hitt, Hoskisson, and Kim, 1997). Innovative firms develop strong, positive
market reputations. They engage in opportunity exploration which includes
behaviour such as looking for ways to improve current products, services or
processes, or trying to think about current work processes, products or services
in alternative ways (De Jong and Wennekers, 2008). Innovative firms also adapt
to market changes and exploit market or opportunity gaps. Sustained innovation
moreover distances entrepreneurial firms from their industry rivals, and thus
increases financial returns (Bhardwaj, Sushil and Momaya, 2007).
Forms of Innovations According to Hamel (1997) in Dess and Lumpkin (2005),
innovations come in different forms: Technological innovativeness primarily
comprises research and engineering efforts aimed at developing new products
and processes. Products-market innovativeness consists of market research,
products design, and innovations in advertising and promotion. Administrative
innovativeness is concerned with novelty in management systems, control
techniques, and organisational structure. Innovation can also be classified in
terms of whether it is incremental, modular, architectural or radical (Henderson
and Clark, 1990 in Hager, 2006):
Incremental Innovation: This comprises relatively small modifications to pre-
existing solutions (Scheepers, 2007). In the view of Henderson and Clark (1990)
in Hager (2006), this type of innovation improves and extends an established
design. Improvement takes place in individual components, but the basic core
design concepts and the linkage between them remain the same. An example is
faster spinning hard drives.
Modular Innovation: This kind of innovation changes the core design of one or
more components but does not change the entire product architecture. This type
of innovation requires new knowledge for one or more components, but the
architectural knowledge remains the same. A good example is the digital phone
which replaced the analogue phone, without changing the phone itself
(Henderson and Clark, 1990 in Hager, 2006).
Architectural Innovation: The essence of this type of innovation is the
reconfiguration of an established system to link together components and parts in
a new way (Henderson and Clark, 1990 in Hager, 2006). According to the
authors, architectural innovation does not mean that the components remain
unchanged but they are changed in a manner that there are new ways of linkage
between the components. The change is so small that the core concept behind
the changed component is the same, and the associated scientific and
91
engineering knowledge remain the same. An example is the technologies where
architectural innovations reduced the size of the hard drives from 14-inches
diameter disks to diameter of 3.5-inches, and from 2.5-inches to 1.8-inches.
Radical Innovation: This type of innovation brings about a new dominant design
and consequently, a new set of core design concepts embodied in components
that are linked together in a new architecture (Hager, 2006). Radical innovation
leads to new solutions that address customer needs (Morris and Kuratko, 2002 in
Scheepers, 2007). In the view of O’Connor and Ayers (2005) in Lassen (2007),
radical innovation is the commercialisation of products or technologies that have
a strong impact on the market, in terms of offering wholly new benefits; and the
firms, in terms of generating new business. Moore (2004) also gives the following
taxonomy of innovation:
Disruptive Innovation: Gets a great deal of attention, particularly in the press,
because markets appear as if from nowhere, creating massive new sources of
wealth. It tends to have its roots in technological discontinuities, such as the one
that enabled Motorola’s rise to prominence with the first generation of cell
phones.
Application Innovation: Takes existing technologies into new markets to serve
new purposes.
Product Innovation: Takes established offers in established markets to the next
level, as when Intel releases a new processor or Toyota a new car. The focus
can be on performance increase, cost reduction, usability improvement or any
other product enhancement.
Process Innovation: Makes processes for established offers in established
markets more effective or efficient. Examples include Dell’s streamlining of its PC
supply chain and order fulfillment systems.
Experiential Innovation: Makes surface modifications that improve customer’s
experience of established products or processes. These can take the form of
delighters (“You’ve got mail!”), satisfiers (superior line management at
Disneyland), or reassures (package tracking from FedEx).
Marketing Innovation:
Improves customer-touching processes be they marketing communications or
consumer transactions
Business Model Innovation: Reframes an established value proposition to the
customer or a company’s established role in the value chain or both. Examples
include IBM’s shift to on demand computing, and Apple’s expansion into
consumer retailing.
92
Structural Innovation: Capitalizes on disruption to restructure industry
relationships. Innovators like banks, for example, that have used the deregulation
of financial services to consumers under one umbrella.
Phases in Successful Innovation
Desouza, Dombrowski, Awazu, Baloh, Papagari, Kim, and Jha, (2007) identify
the following five essential phases of successful innovation:
Idea Generation and Mobilization
This phase is the starting point for new ideas. Successful idea generation should
be stimulated by the pressure to compete and by the freedom to explore. Once a
new idea is generated, it is conveyed to the mobilization phase, wherein the idea
travels to a different physical or logical location. Because most inventors are not
also marketers, a new idea often needs someone other than its originator to
move it along. This phase is crucially important to the progression of a new idea,
and omitting it can delay or even sabotage the innovation process (Desouza et
al., 2007).
Advocacy and Screening
According to the authors, this phase is the period for weighing an idea’s costs
and benefits. Advocacy and screening have to take place simultaneously to weed
out ideas that lack potential without allowing stakeholders to reject ideas
impulsively solely on the basis of their novelty. Firms will have more success
when the evaluation process is transparent and standardized, because
employees feel more comfortable contributing when they could anticipate how
their ideas would be judged.
Experimentation
The experimentation phase assesses the sustainability of ideas for a particular
firm at a particular time – and in a particular environment. In this phase, it is
essential to determine who the customer will be and what he or she will use the
innovation for. With that in mind, the firm might discover that although someone
has a great idea, it is ahead of its time or just not right for a particular market.
However, it is important not to interpret these kinds of discoveries as failures –
they could actually be the catalysts of new and better ideas (Desouza et al.,
(2007).
Commercialisation
In this phase, the firm should look to its customers to verify that innovation
actually solves their problems and then should analyse the costs and benefits of
rolling out the innovation. According to the Desouza et al (2007), an invention is
only considered an innovation once it has been commercialised. Therefore, the
commercialisation phase is a significant one similar to advocacy in that it takes
the right people to progress the idea to the next developmental phase.
93
Diffusion and Implementation
According to the authors, diffusion is the process of gaining final, company
overall acceptance of an innovation. Implementation is the process of setting up
the structures, maintenance and resources needed to produce it. According to
Loewe and Dominiquini (2006), good innovation processes share the following
characteristics: Allow divergence and exploration at the front end. This helps
ensure that the new ideas generated are not simply a repeat of what has been
done before. Synthesize individual ideas into bigger platforms before selecting
individual ideas to develop further. This enables the company to avoid "gambling
the farm" on one idea without first learning about the larger opportunities at hand.
How can one be innovative? One can become innovative through continuous
searching for better ways of doing things, it is the attitude that challenge status
quo
• Copyright Laws in Nigeria
• Strategies for Protection of Intellectual Property (original ideas, concepts,
products
4.0 Conclusion
Know you right and how to protect your right. This is key in idea creation and
innovation. Seek the law when need arises.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
https://www.upcounsel.com/intellectual-property-protection
shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in/bitstream/10603/14592/6/06_introduction.pdf
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intellectual_property
94
Unit 2: Copyright Laws in Nigeria
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Some persons would have been great entrepreneurs with their great ideas. But
this could not find the light of the day because somebody somewhere stole the
idea. Therefore, what do we do to protect our ideas? Does it mean business
ideas cannot be shared? If so, what happens when you are called to present
your business proposal or plan? These and more questions could be asked. In
this unit you will find answers on what the law says.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to apply the copy right law in protecting
business idea.
3.0 Main Content
Intellectual property (IP) refers to creations of the mind, such as inventions;
literary and artistic works; designs; and symbols, names and images used in
commerce.
Types of intellectual property
Copyright
Copyright is a legal term used to describe the rights that creators have over their
literary and artistic works. Works covered by copyright range from books, music,
paintings, sculpture and films, to computer programs, databases,
advertisements, maps and technical drawings
THE NIGERIAN COPYRIGHT ACT, CAP C28. Act to make provisions for the
definition, protection, transfer, infringement of and remedy and penalty thereof of
the copyright in literary works, musical works, artistic works, cinematograph
films, sound recordings, broadcast and other ancillary matters.
95
THE NIGERIAN COPYRIGHT ACT, CAP C28. n Act to make provisions for the
definition, protection, transfer, infringement of and remedy and penalty thereof of
the copyright in literary works, musical works, artistic works, cinematograph
films, sound recordings, broadcast and other ancillary matters.
Copyright Act
Chapter 68
Laws of the Federation of Nigeria 1990
Part 1
Copyright
1. Subject to this section, the following shall be eligible for copyright-
a. literary works;
b. musical works;
c. artistic works;
d. cinematograph works;
e. sound recording; and
f. broadcasts.
2. A literary, musical, or artistic work shall not be eligible for copyright unless-
a. sufficient effort has been expended on making the work to give it an
original character;
b. the work has been fixed in any definite medium of expression now known
or later to be developed, from which it can be perceived, reproduced or
otherwise communicated either directly or with the aid of any machine or
device.
3. An artistic work shall not be eligible for copyright, if at the time when the work
is made, it is intended by the author to be used as a model or pattern to be
multiplied by any industrial process.
4. A work shall not be ineligible for copyright by reason only that the making of
the work or the doing of any act in relation to the work involved an
infringement of copyright in some other work.
5. Copyright shall be conferred by this section on every work eligible for
copyright of which the author or, in the case of a work of joint authorship, any
of the authors is at the time when the work is made, a qualified person, that is
to say-
a. an individual who is a citizen of, or is domiciled in Nigeria; or
b. a body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of Nigeria.
c. the term of copyright conferred by this section shall be calculated
according to the table set out in the First Schedule to this Act. In the case
96
of anonymous or pseudonymous literary, musical or artistic works the
copyright therein shall subsist until the end of the expiration of seventy
years from the end of the year in which the work was first published:
Provided that, when the author becomes known, the term of copyright
shall be calculated in accordance with paragraph 1 of the First Schedule
to this Act.
d. In the case of a work of joint authorship, a reference in the First Schedule
to this Act to the death of the author shall be taken to refer to the author
who dies last, whether or not he is a qualified person within subsection (1)
of this section.
6. (1) Copyright shall be conferred by this section on every work, which is eligible
for copyright and which-
(a) being a literary, musical or artistic work or a cinematograph film, is first
published in Nigeria; or
(b) being a sound recording, is made in Nigeria,
and which has not been the subject of copyright conferred by section 2 of this
Act.
(2) Copyright conferred on a work by this section shall have some duration as is
provided by section 2 of this Act in relation to the same type of work.
7. (1) Copyright shall be conferred by this section on every work, which is eligible
for copyright and is made by or under the direction or control of the Government,
a State authority or prescribed international body.
(2) The term of copyright conferred by this section shall be calculated in
accordance with the table set out in the First Schedule to this Act.
8. (1) Subject to the exceptions specified in the Second Schedule to this Act,
copyright in a work shall be exclusive right to control the doing in Nigeria of any
of the following acts, that is-
(a) in the case of a literary or musical work, to do and authorise the doing of any
of the following acts-
(i) Reproduce the work any material form;
(ii) Publish the work;
(iii) Perform the work in public;
(iv) Produce, reproduce, perform or publish any translation of the work;
(v) Make any cinematograph film or a record in respect of the work;
(vi) Distribute to the public, for commercial purposes, copies of the work, by way
of rental, lease, hire, loan or similar arrangement;
(vii) Broadcast or communicate the work to the public by a loud speaker or any
other similar device;
(viii) Make an adaptation of the work;
(ix) do in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the work, any of the acts
specified in relation to the work in sub-paragraphs (I) to (vii) of this paragraph;
97
(b) in the case of an artistic work, to do or authorize the doing of any of the
following acts, that is-
(i) Reproduce the work in any material form,
(ii) Publish the work.
(iii) Include the work in any cinematograph film,
(iv) Make an adaptation of the work,
(v) Do in relation to an adaptation of the work in subparagraphs (I) to (iii) of this
paragraph;
(c) In the case of cinematograph film, to do or authorise the doing of any of the
following acts, that is-
(i) make a copy of the film,
(ii) Cause the film, in so far as it consists of visual images to be seen in public
and, in so far as it consists of sounds, to be heard in public,
(iii) Make any record embodying the recording in any part of the sound track
associated with the film by utilising such sound track,
(iv) Distribute to the public, for commercial purposes copies of the work, by way
of rental, lease, hire, loan or similar arrangement.
(2) The doing of any of the acts referred in subsection (1) of this section shall be
in respect of the whole or a substantial part of the work either in its original form
or in any form recognisably derived from the original.
(3) Copyright in a work of architecture shall also include the exclusive right to
control the erection of any building which reproduces the whole or a substantial
part of the work either in its original form or in any form recognizably derived from
the original, but not the right to control the reconstruction in the same style as the
original of a building to which the copyright relates.
9. (1) Copyright in a sound recording shall be exclusive right to control in Nigeria-
(a) the direct or indirect reproduction, broadcasting or communication to the
public of the whole or a substantial part of the recording either in its original form
or in any form recognisably derived from the original;
(b) the distribution to the public for commercial purposes of copies of the work by
way of rental, lease, hire, loan or similar arrangement.
(2) The exception specified in paragraphs (a), (h), (k), (l), and (p) of the Second
Schedule to this Act shall apply to the copyright in sound recording in like manner
as they apply to copyright in literary, musical or artistic work or a cinematograph
film.
(3) The provision of the Third Schedule to this Act shall apply in respect of sound
recording.
98
10. (1) Subject to this section, copyright in a broadcast shall be the exclusive
right to control the doing Nigeria of any of the following acts, that is-
(a) the recording and the re-broadcast of the whole or a substantial part of the
broadcast;
(b) the communication to the public of the whole or a substantial part of a
television broadcast, either in its original form or in any form recognisably derived
from the original; and
(c) the distribution to the public for the commercial purposes, of copies of the
work, by way of rental, lease, hire, loan or similar arrangement.
(2) The copyright in a television broadcast shall include the right to control the
taking of still photographs from the broadcast.
(3) The exceptions specified in paragraphs (a), (h), (k) and (o) of the Second
Schedule to this Act shall apply to the copyright in a broadcast, in like manner as
they apply to copyright in literary, musical or artistic work or a cinematograph
film.
11. (1) Where the owner of the copyright in any literary, musical or artistic work
authorises a person to incorporate the work in a cinematograph film and a
broadcasting authority broadcasts the film, the owner of the copyright shall, in the
absence of any express agreement to the contrary between the owner and that
person, be deemed to have authorised the broadcast.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (10 of this section, where a broadcasting
authority broadcasts a cinematograph film in which a musical work is
incorporated, the owner of the right to broadcast the musical work shall, subject
to this Act, be entitled to receive fair compensation from the broadcasting
authority.
12. (1) Copyright conferred by sections 2 and 3 of this Act, shall vest initially in
the author.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (6) of section 10 of this Act where a work-
(a) is commissioned by a person who is not the author’s employer under a
contract of service of apprenticeship; or
(b) not having been so commissioned, is made in the course of the author’s
employment,
99
the copyright shall belong in the first instance to the author, unless otherwise
stipulated in writing under contract.
(3) Where a literary, artistic or musical work is made by the author in the course
of his employment by the proprietor of a newspaper, magazine or similar
periodical under a contract of service or apprenticeship as is so made for the
purpose of publication in a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical, the said
proprietor shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be the first
owner of copyright in the work in so far as the copyright relates to the publication
of the work in any newspaper, magazine or similar periodical,; or to the
reproduction of the work for the purpose of its been so published; but in all other
respects, the author shall be the first owner of the copyright in the work.
(4) In the case of a cinematograph film or sound recording, the author shall be
obliged to conclude, prior to the making of the work, contracts in writing with all
those whose works are to be used in the making of the work.
(5) Copyright conferred by section 4 of this Act, shall vest initially in the
Government on behalf of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, in the State authority
on behalf of the State in question, or in the international body in question, as the
case may be, and not in the author.
13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, copyright shall be transmitted by
assignment, by testamentary disposition or by operation of law, as movable
property.
(2) An assignment or testamentary disposition of copyright may be limited so as
to apply to only some of the acts which the owner of the copyright has the
exclusive right to control, or to a party only of the period of the copyright, or to a
specified country or other geographical area.
(3) No assignment of copyright and no exclusive license to do an act the doing of
which is controlled by copyright shall have effect unless it is in writing.
(4) A non-exclusive license to do an act the doing of which is controlled by
copyright may be written or oral, or may be inferred from conduct.
(5) An assignment or license granted by one copyright owner shall have effect as
if granted by his co-owner also, and, subject to any contract between them, fees
received by the grantors shall be divided equitably between all the co-owners.
(6) For the purpose of this section, persons shall be deemed to be co-owners-
(a) if they share a joint interest in the whole or any part of a copyright; or
100
(b) if they have interests in the various copyrights in a composite production, that
is to say, a production consisting of two or more works.
(7) An assignment, license or testamentary disposition be effectively granted or
made in respect of a future work or an existing work in which copyright does not
yet subsist; and the prospective copyright in any such work shall be transmissible
by operation of law as movable property.
(8) A testamentary disposition of material on which a work is first written or
otherwise recorded shall, in the absence of any contrary indication, be presumed
to include any copyright or prospective copyright in the work which is vested in
the deceased.
14. (1) The owner of a copyright has the right-
(a) to claim authorship of his work, in particular that his authorship be indicated in
connection with any of the acts referred to in section 5 of this Act except when
the work is included incidentally or accidentally when reporting current events by
means of broadcasting.
(b) To object and to seek relief in connection with any distortion, mutilation or
other modification of, and any other derogatory action in relation to his work,
where such action would be or is prejudicial to his honour or reputation.
(2) The rights referred to in subsection (1) of this section, are perpetual,
inalienable and imprescriptible.
(3) For the purpose of this section, "author" includes his heirs and successors-in-
title.
12. (1) Notwithstanding any assignment or sale of original work, the authors or
graphic works, three-dimensional works and manuscript shall have an inalienable
right to share in the proceeds of any sale of that work or manuscript by public
auction or through a dealer whatever the method used by the latter to carry out
the operation.
(2) The right conferred by this section shall apply to originals of such work.
(3) The conditions for the exercise of the right conferred by this section shall be
determined by regulations to be made by the Nigerian Copyright Council
established under section 30 of this Act.
(4) The foregoing provisions of this section, shall not apply to architectural works
or applied art.
(5) In this section, "author" includes heirs and successors-in-title.
101
13. Publishers, printers, producers or manufacturers of works in which copyright
subsists shall keep a register of all works produced by them showing the
following, that is-
(a) the name of the author;
(b) the title;
(c) year of production; and
(d) the quantity of work produced.
14. (1) Copyright is infringed by any person who without the licence or
authorisation of the owner of the copyright-
(a) does, or cause any other person to do an act, the doing of which is controlled
by copyright;
(b) imports into Nigeria, otherwise than for his private or domestic use, any article
in respect of which copyright is infringed under paragraph (a) of this subsection;
(c) exhibits in public any article in respect of which copyright is infringed under
paragraph (a) of this subsection;
(d) distributes by way of trade, offer for sale, hire or otherwise or for any purpose
prejudicial to the owner of the copyright, any article in respect of which copyright
is infringed under paragraph (a)of this subsection;
(e) makes or has in his possession, plates, master tapes, machines, equipment
or contrivances used for the purpose of making infringed copies of the work;
(f) permits a place of public entertainment or of business to be used for a
performance in the public of the work, where the performance constitutes an
infringed of the copyright in the work, unless the person permitting the place to
be used is not aware, and had no reasonable ground for suspecting that the
performance would be an infringement of the copyright;
(g) Performs or cause to be performed for the purposes of trade or business or
as supporting facility to a trade or business or as supporting facility to a trade or
business, any work in which copyright subsists.
Patents
What is a patent?
A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention, which is a product or a
process that provides, in general, a new way of doing something, or offers a new
102
technical solution to a problem. To get a patent, technical information about the
invention must be disclosed to the public in a patent application.
What is a trademark?
Distinctive design, graphics, logo, symbols, words, or any combination thereof
that uniquely identifies a firm and/or its goods or services, guarantees the item's
genuineness, and gives it owner the legal rights to prevent the trademark's
unauthorized use.
A trademark must be
(1) Distinctive instead of descriptive,
(2) Affixed to the item sold, and
(3) Registered with the appropriate authority to obtain legal ownership and
protection rights.
Trademark rights are granted usually for 7 to 20 years and, unlike in case of
patents, are renewable indefinitely. These rights are protected worldwide by
international intellectual property treaties and may be assigned by their owner to
other parties.
Self-Assessment Exercises
1. What are Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)?
2. What does copyright cover?
Feedback
1. IPR is a general term covering patents, copyright, trademark, industrial designs,
geographical indications, layout design of integrated circuits, undisclosed information
(trade secrets) and new plant varieties.
2. It covers:
i. Literary, dramatic and musical work. Computer programs/software are covered
within the definition of literary work;
ii. Artistic work;
iii. Cinematographic films which include sound track and video films;
iv. Record-any disc, tape, perforated roll or other device.
4.0 Conclusion
In setting up a business, know your right and identify the existing laws to protect
your rights.
103
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
https://www.lawyard.ng/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/COPYRIGHT-ACT-2004.pdf
www.nigeria-law.org/CopyrightAct.htm
104
Unit 3 Strategies for Protection of Intellectual Property
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
There are procedure in place in intellectual property protection. In this unit, you
will learn some of these strategies and how they can be applied to achieve a
desirable goal.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to demonstrate competency in applying
different strategies to protect your intellectual property.
3.0 Main Content
WAYS TO PROTECT INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHT
by Kelly Fitzsimmons
How important is intellectual property protection to your startup? Not too long
ago, defensible IP was one of the top things venture capitalists wanted to see in
a startup. But the success of several high-profile tech startups, such as Twitter
and Facebook, that are relatively weak on patentable intellectual property, has
caused many to rethink that assumption. After all, creating and maintaining a
robust IP portfolio is expensive. Patents don’t determine whether a startup will
be able to scale. And the lean startup model is all about getting to market fast
with the minimum viable product. Launch first, patent later… if at all.
But every startup – lean or not – needs to plan for success. If your startup starts
to scale quickly, a strong IP portfolio will be vitally important to your ability to play
the long game. The world’s largest innovators, including Google, Microsoft and
Apple, seem to agree. During the past six months, these companies have spent
more than $18 billion on intellectual property in the voice space alone. They’re
investing top dollar to ensure that their corporate IP portfolios are diverse, rich in
innovation, and allow them to hedge against many possible futures.
So what should startups do to protect their IP assets?
105
• Patent what is important to others, not just you
• Make time to get smart on intellectual property. Educate yourself and team
on the basics of trademarks, copyrights, patents, and trade secrets.
Investing a day or two early on will save headaches later.
• Reduce costs by doing your own IP searches first. Start with a Google
patent search at google.com/patents.
• Work with an attorney who specializes in intellectual property and ask for
a fixed rate to file.
• Save money by working with a patent attorney from a different geography.
Ivy-league lawyers in Wisconsin are just as good as Ivy-league lawyers in
New York City. The cost savings may be upwards of 50%, and
sometimes more.
• Patents aren't your only asset. Conduct an audit to identify all your
registered and unregistered trademarks and copyrights.
• Invest in well-written non-disclosure agreements (NDAs). Make sure your
employment agreements, licenses, sales contracts and technology
transfer agreements all protect your intellectual property too, right from the
get-go.
• File as fast as you can. A patent application holds your place in line. You
will have 12 months from that initial submission to expand upon your filing.
And remember, US patents can take more than five years to issue.
• Investigate international patents if key competitors are outside the US. A
US patent will not protect you against competitors in Europe, never mind
China.
• Think hard about the future. From your vantage point, what does the
future look like? Use this information to devise your patent strategy, and to
figure out which of your work needs to be legally protected. From there,
your patent applications should flow.
As President Lincoln once remarked, the patent system adds "the fuel of interest
to the fire of genius." IP rights, which include patents, trademarks, trade secrets
and copyrights--even the right URLs--play an essential role in monetizing
innovation. If you make it easy for others to steal your ideas, you can ultimately
end up washing away your own path to success
Self-Assessment Exercise
1. If an employee in a company develops a program, would this employee own
the
copyright?
2. What is the rule for the transfer of copyright?
106
Feedback
1. No. In the case of a program made during author's employment under a
contract of service or apprenticeship, the employer shall, in the absence
of any agreement to the contrary, be the first owner of the copyright.
2. The owner of the copyright in an existing work or prospective owner of
the copyright in a future work may assign to any person the copyright,
either wholly or partially in the following manner.
a. for the entire world or for a specific country or territory; or
b. for the full term of copyright or part thereof; or
c. relating to all the rights comprising the copyright or only part of
such rights
4.0 Conclusion
Your startup can be marred. Do not ignore the right to protect your intellectual
property.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/intproperty/450/wipo_pub_450.pdf
https://www.forbes.com/sites/.../2016/.../nine-ways-to-protect-your-intellectual-
property
107
Module 4 Technological Entrepreneurship
Unit 1 The Interface between Technology Development and
Entrepreneurship
Unit 2 Technological Development and Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Unit 3 Technological Environment and Business
Unit 4 New Technology and Entrepreneurship Opportunities
Unit 1 The Interface between Technology Development and
Entrepreneurship
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Readings
1.0 Introduction
From time immemorial technology direct the trend in business. As an individual
or organization the use of technology is vital. This is found more significant in
daily activities in all sectors. Therefore in this unit you will learn the twist
between technology and entrepreneurship.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to interpret the dynamics of technology in
entrepreneurship.
3.0 Main Content
Technological change provides the basis for the creation of new processes, new
products, new markets, and new ways of organizing; and entrepreneurship is
central to this process (Schumpeter 1934, p. 66). However, before technological
change results in this process of entrepreneurial exploitation, entrepreneurs must
discover opportunities in which to use the new technologies. Because
opportunities do not appear in a prepackaged form (Venkataraman 1997), this
process of opportunity identification is far from trivial. In any given new
108
technology, entrepreneurs could fail to identify any opportunities, or could identify
the wrong opportunities, making an explanation for the discovery of opportunities
an important part of the domain of entrepreneurship research. Unfortunately,
most research on entrepreneurship investigates the entrepreneurial process after
opportunities have been discovered (Fiet 1996). Researchers typically adopt this
approach because they draw on neoclassical economic or psychological theories
that assume people will discover the same opportunities in a given technological
change (Khilstrom and Laffont 1979), or discover opportunities that are
uncorrelated with the attributes of the discoverers (Evans and Jovanovic 1989).
Austrian economics challenges the validity of these assumptions, arguing that
different people will discover different opportunities in a given technological
change because they possess different prior knowledge (Venkataraman 1997).
Because the accuracy of these assumptions has important implications for the
development of entrepreneurship theory, I explore them in this article. Through
in-depth case studies of entrepreneurs who exploit a single MIT invention, I show
results that challenge the core assumptions of neoclassical economic and
psychological approaches to entrepreneurship.
In particular, I show that (1) any given technological change will generate a range
of entrepreneurial opportunities that are not obvious to all potential
entrepreneurs; (2) entrepreneurs can and will discover these opportunities
without searching for them; and (3) any given entrepreneur will discover only
those opportunities related to his or her prior knowledge (Venkatarman 1997).
This evidence supports the Austrian argument that the discovery of
entrepreneurial opportunities depends, in part, on the distribution of information
in society (Kirzner 1973) and provides important implications for the theory and
practice of entrepreneurship
Read:
In a research paper titled Technological Innovation: An Imperative Tool for
Entrepreneurship Development in Nigeria by OYEWALE I.O; ADEYEMO S.A
and OGUNLEYE P.O documented the following :
Entrepreneurship is about starting a new business based on a recognized
business opportunity as well as operating and maintaining that business. The
belief of some people is that entrepreneurship does not need to be taught and
therefore, an entrepreneur is born to be so. It should however be noted that for
one to be a successful entrepreneur, he/she needs to learn the skills (Griffin and
Hammis, 2001). Entrepreneur training is designed to teach the skills and
knowledge that is needed to know before embarking on a new business venture.
This would enhance necessary identification and avoidance of many pitfalls
awaiting the less well trained and vigilant contemporaries. The training may
initially be perceived as a cost in terms of time and money but it would eventually
be appreciated. The study carried out by Taiwo et al. (2002), on small scale food
companies in Nigeria reported that one major sources of technological change in
109
these companies is personnel (operators and craftsmen). The reasons adduced
for these were simplicity of the innovation processes to the work force; accurate
and adequate information about the system of production; and the involvement of
the workforce in the initiation and implementation of any technological changes.
Moreover, another research finding showed that the key information sources for
manufacturing small and medium firms„ production and innovation are machinery
suppliers, exhibition and trade fairs, client firms, publications, repair workshops
(foundries, heat treatment shops and others), staff of other firms, and social and
professional associations, and consultancy firms within and outside the clusters
(Oyeyinka-Oyelaran, 2001). Some researchers observe that increasing profit of
organization is because of change in technology. (Verspagen, 1992; Ruttan,
1997). According to entrepreneur perspective innovations mean creativity.
“Innovation is a research area within the Marketing and Entrepreneurship
Interface is a growing area of enquiry” (Fillis 2000a, 2000b; Fillis and McAuley
2000, Hackley and Mumby Croft 1998). Entrepreneurship opportunity
identification and need to fulfilling innovation. Entrepreneurship and innovation is
a key of economic growth, and there is strong relationship between
entrepreneurial activity and economic development across the border.
Entrepreneurship has also play a vital role in motivation. You can motivate
entrepreneurship through culture, family and friend business. Another aspect of
motivation is to motivate your employees by giving incentives, bonuses and
increase salaries but according to entrepreneurship motivation is a deep
meaning that to motivate your family and friend in the field of entrepreneurship u
can give new and innovative idea to your friend to start new business and also
running your family business with new creative ideas. We cannot understand
entrepreneurship until and unless we understand the single who involve in
motivation (Venkataraman, 1997).
Entrepreneurship is an employment strategy that can lead to economic self-
sufficiency for people. It makes people to create and manage businesses in
which they function as the employer or boss rather than merely being and
employee. In this perspective technology is not a neutral tool, but something that
at the same time supports and constraints human action, thinking and even
deepest values. Each technological innovation brings with it a wave of new
startups and new entrepreneurs, but probably the way entrepreneurship is
deployed changes in any major technological revolution. Innovation is seen to be
instrumental in increasing the country’s competitiveness and wealth, and SMEs
are at the core of the economic growth of several industrial countries. But these
small and medium firms rarely engage in R and D, and the product and process
improvements are of minor kinds. Therefore, the results show that there are
some policy implications from this study. There is urgent need for enterprise-
oriented technology transfer units to link the science and technology system with
the production system. This then calls for constant re-tooling and re-engineering
of the country’s SMEs development agencies to be able to design and implement
an effective mechanism to strengthen information flow relationships from the
national innovation system of the country to the SMEs.
110
Self-Assessment Exercises
1. what is the relationship between entrepreneurship and technology?
2. What can you say is the role of technology in entrepreneurship and to
Entrepreneurs?
Feedback
1. Technological innovations result when new rules and ideas find
practical use through being applied and/or commercialized by
entrepreneurs. Technological innovation contributes to higher levels of
economic output and can deliver new goods and services that change
human lives and capabilities.
2. Entrepreneurial ventures are considered as the engines for the
development of economy and nation. They are the transformation
agents and knowledge resource of the nation upon who the
responsibility of structured development and radical changes is there.
Entrepreneurs need Technology for undertaking these responsibilities.
Technology as a method, tool, process or modification work as a
support element for entrepreneurship development.
4.0 Conclusion
Not all technology can drive a business. Therefore, choose your technology
based on your type of business and your business objectives if you are to
achieve the benefit of using technology to drive your business.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
111
6.0 References/Further Reading
Manev, I. M., & Manolova, T. S. (2010). Entrepreneurship in Transitional
Economies: Review and Integration of Two Decades of Research. Journal of
Developmental Entrepreneurship, 15(01), pp. 69–99.
Medovnikov D. S. (Ed.) (2013). Small innovative entrepreneurship: cases of
Russian companies. Moscow, MAKS Press.
Nichols, S. P., & Armstrong, N. E. (2003). Engineering entrepreneurship: Does
entrepreneurship have a role in engineering education? IEEE Antennas and
Propagation Magazine, 45, pp. 134–138.
112
Unit 2 Technological Environment and Business
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Availability of technology and usage differ from place to place. A technology that
is found very useful in a particular environment may be less useful in another
environment. In business, it is important to study the prevailing technology in an
environment to determine the type of technology that may be required for a
business startup or in sustaining an existing business.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to evaluate technological environment for
a business operation.
3.0 Main Content
Technological environment refers to the state of science and technology in the
country and related aspects such as rate of technological progress, institutional
arrangements for development and application of new technology, etc.
According to the well-known economist J.K. Galbraith, technology means,
“systematic application of scientific or other organized knowledge to practical
tasks”. Technology comprises of both machines (hard technology) and scientific
thinking (soft technology) used to solve problems and promote progress. It
consists of not only knowledge and methods required to carry on and improve
production and distribution of goods and services but also entrepreneurial
expertise and professional know how. Technology includes inventions and
innovations.
.
The main features of technological environment are as follows:
• Technological environment is a component of macro or indirect action
environment.
• Technological environment changes very fast.
• Technological environment affects the manner in which the resources of
the economy are converted into output.
113
• Technological environment is self-reinforcing. An invention in one place
leads to a sequence of inventions in other places.
Technological Change
Technological change is improvement in the 'art' of making products or
developing processes. Barney's biggest threat is new technological products and
processes that are destroying the traditional print industry. A technological
product is just something that man created using the application of knowledge to
improve a person's life, environment or society.
In Barney's case, the new technological products wreaking havoc with his
business are e-readers and computer tablets. Every year, more and more
consumers are ditching the printed word for digital.
A technological process is a means to make and improve products and
services. For example, the traditional manner of 'printing' magazines involved a
mechanical printing press. Now, a new technological process has been
developed to digitize the magazine to be transmitted and stored electronically.
Barney figures if he can't beat technological change, then his company must
embrace it. He has decided to turn his print magazine into a digital one that will
be readable on all major e-readers and computer tablets. He may also have to
adopt or develop new technological processes for the production and distribution
of his new e-magazine.
Advantages of Change
IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGY ON BUSINESS:
Impact on society/ social implications Impact on economy/ economic implications
Impact on plant/ plant level implications
SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS:
• Technology reaches people through business
• High expectations of customers
• System complexity
• Social changes
• Social systems
ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS:
• Increased productivity
• Need to spend on R & D
• Jobs become intellectual
• Problems of techno structure
• Bio professional & multiprofessional managers
• Increased regulations & stiff opposition
• Demand for capital
114
• Rise & decline of products & organizations
• Boundaries redefined
IMPORT OF TECHNOLOGY/METHODS OF TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER:
• Foreign investment
• Joint venture
• Training or employment of technical expert
• Contract for supply of machinery & equipment
• Licensing agreements
• Turnkey contracts
APPROPRIATE TECHNOLOGY:
Appropriate technology (AT) is technology that is designed with special
consideration to the environmental, ethical, cultural, social and economic aspects
of the community it is intended for. With these goals in mind, AT typically requires
fewer resources, is easier to maintain, has a lower overall cost and less of an
impact on the environment compared to industrialized practices
PROBLEMS IN TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER:
• Unwillingness on the part of the government
• Lack of resources
• Obsolete technology
• Inappropriate technology
• Costly Lack of technological know-how
Self-Assessment Exercises
1. What is technological environment?
2. How does the technological environment affect a business?
Feedback
1. technological environment consists of External factors in technology that
impact business operations. A business may have to dramatically change
their operating strategy because of changes in the technological
environment.
2. Businesses are affected by changes in the technological environment.
Technology is simply the application of knowledge to control or change our
environment. ... Some businesses can leverage changing technology to
improve products and processes or even create new products and
processes that will expand markets and profits.
115
4.0 Conclusion
In planning a business, the technological requirement should also be planned
along. At the startup of a business, a particular technology may be found suiting
which may not be the case few months or years after startup. Therefore, to
sustain a business in a dynamic society with technological changes, there must
be continuous review of activities to evaluate achievement. This is important
because sometimes some entrepreneurs do not know a change in technology is
pushing them out of business until it becomes obvious.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
www.businessdictionary.com/definition/technological-environment.html
https://bizfluent.com/info-7950023-impact-technology-business-environment.html
Kotler, P & Armstrong, G., 2004, “Principles of Marketing”, Upper Saddle River,
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Muhlbacher, H, Dahringer, L. & Leihs, H. 2006, "International marketing: a global
perspective", London: Thomson Learning,
116
Unit 3 New Technology and Entrepreneurship Opportunities
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Every business, small dedicated company and big multinational alike, once upon
a time was established because their founders saw a business opportunity, or to
be more precise: an entrepreneurial business opportunity. Entrepreneurial here
indicates that a new firm may have a good chance, and perhaps even a better
chance than established companies, of successfully exploiting the opportunity.
Understanding how to recognize and evaluate entrepreneurial business
opportunities based on developments in science and technology constitutes the
core of these new developments.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to evaluate new technologies for business
3.0 Main Content
The advent of digital revolution in late 1950s ushered in a new era of modern
technology, which was a result of constant innovation and change. The world
saw how many opportunities were brought in by this new found marvel, and thus,
began the process of exploiting and developing new technology in order to gain
more power and assist in development across various sectors, industrial or
otherwise.
The extent and power of technology was further witnessed when it came within
the reach of various business owners, who saw the growth and possibilities it
could bring into their businesses. Soon, having a technological advantage over
other competitive players in the market became the pinnacle for success in
businesses of all shapes and sizes. Thereafter, advancement in technology
became one of the major contributing factors in expansion and success of many
business ventures
Nowadays, there are many startups that have emerged by exploring new and
innovative technology and are dedicated to further their growth using the same.
With extensive market research, many entrepreneurs have been able to pinpoint
117
current trends that could help in developing that kind of technology for both
businesses and consumers.
Building a business from scratch can be a daunting and tiresome task, which
involves many risks and minimal guaranty of success. Around 25 per cent of
startups fail in their first year of business due to various factors like lack of
experience and improper book keeping skills. Therefore, prior industry
experience and knowledge can help entrepreneurs build their business with
adequate planning and design in place.
Modern world is dominated by innovative ideas and new technology, but
innovation alone cannot facilitate success. Innovators need a great start to
further their ideas and explore newer and better avenues. Similarly, startups
require initial funding so they can kick-start their business till the time it starts
generating revenues on its own. Investors look for dynamic entrepreneurship
ventures and only invest in the cream of the crop. A great idea and persuasive
ability can help startups gain investors who could help them in expanding their
business goals.
With so many tech startups coming into existence, investors and partnership
firms can only handle so much funding as well as managing their own
businesses. To facilitate this kind of monetary assistance for fledgling business
ventures, various forms of funding have been made available specifically for this
purpose. Entrepreneurs can get funding for their startups through different
sources such as - angel investors, which consist of wealthy and prominent
people who provide business funding to startups, and crowdfunding, which
involves raising money for any kind of venture through the involvement of a large
audience at a single platform, usually the Internet.
Tech startups can also expand their reach to potential customers with the help of
World Wide Web. Having an online presence can greatly influence the reach of
entrepreneurial ventures and help accelerate their growth. Technology is
constantly evolving with changing times due to varying consumer preferences
and startups are slowly becoming an excellent example to showcase and
promote exactly that.
Startups have recently become a great way to further the progress of technology
since they are helmed by constant innovation and meticulous planning. Building
a startup requires lot of dedication and hard work as creating a new venture from
scratch can be tiresome, yet fulfilling. It gives an entrepreneur the chance to
explore uncharted territories and create something which may have great
significance to every individual in its future.
Hundreds of tech startups are popping up every day either out of personal
ambition, or a genuine fascination to explore new avenues with modern
technological assistance. Business is no longer just about buying and selling of
goods and services, but how technology can be used to assist and expand those
services. People can now access any service they desire off the internet, many
118
businesses which began as startups have become successful after garnering
customers mostly through their online presence.
With new technical advancements at the helm, modern entrepreneurs are not
apprehensive about minimum success or courting failure since most of them
have recognized the need of the hour, viz. Technology, and with that kind of
knowledge, they can further hone their skills as well as work on creating a better
business module.
Over the years, there has been an increase in number of startups, or
entrepreneurial ventures that have come into existence. Despite the risks
involved, many of them have charted through unfavorable circumstances and
flourished mostly through innovation of modern technology. Therefore, one can
safely assume that tech startups are here to stay and may help in contributing to
the constant process of innovation and development of technology.
Self-Assessment Exercises
1. What comes to your mind when new technology is mentioned in relation to
entrepreneurship?
2. As a student of Entrepreneurship, list some of these new technologies?
119
Feedback
1. New technology has to do with the understanding of how to recognize and
evaluate entrepreneurial business opportunities based on developments in
science and technology. That is what constitutes the core of these new
developments.
2. Let us explore some of these technologies together
a. Virtual Offices. As millennials slowly take over the workforce, it’s
important for businesses to realize that their employees don’t work in
the same way as previous generations. The ability to work remotely is
important to a lot of younger professionals because it is a generation of
convenience and streamlining.
b. Partnerships. Businesses are now teaming up with publishers,
platforms, content creators and online influencers to push their
products and services, connecting with consumers across the digital
ecosystem. Building those partnerships will be key to future success
c. Original Content. Customers are loyal to brands that share their
values, but how exactly do you show your consumers that your values
align with theirs? The answer is high quality, original content.
d. Live Video. The web has seen the rise of live streaming over the past
year. Everyone has embraced the live video option available on
platforms such as Facebook Live.
e. APIs. It’s no secret at this point that for a company to be successful,
they can’t rely on only one avenue to connect with their customers.
f. Secure In-Person Payments. Buyers want to ensure that their data
and personal information is safe. Companies who don’t adjust to
accept the cards in their new form (meaning they continue to use
swipe machines, rather than the more and more common “dip” option)
in the next year will lose credibility among their customers.
g. Focus on Mobile Ads. In the last two years, mobile usage has
exceeded that of traditional desktop or laptop computers. People are
doing everything on their mobile devices: reading, banking, shopping,
gaming … you name it.
h. Consistency Between Platforms
i. Augmented and Virtual Reality. Augmented and virtual reality was
mostly reserved for gaming.
j. Data, Data, Data
4.0 Conclusion
New technology emerges on a daily basis. The emergence of technology brings
about high competition in entrepreneurship. New technology is key in building a
startup for sustainability.
120
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
https://yourstory.com/2016/11/technology-opportunity/
Sachs, J. 1990. Creating a Market Economy in Eastern Europe: The Case of
Poland, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Paper on Economic Activity.
121
Module 5 Management and Innovation
Unit 1 The Concept, Nature and Types of Innovation
Unit 2 Innovation Theory of Entrepreneurship
Unit 3 Financing Innovation and New Ventures
Unit 4 Change Management
Unit 5 Technical Change and Management of Innovation
Unit 1 The Concept, Nature and Types of Innovation
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
The means that was found must viable in remembering communication and
policies is through documentation. Documentation started through means of
writing. Again writing started by writing on sand with bear fingers. Today,
computer is the popular means of documentation. Before computer, there was
qwerty typewriter, electric typewriter and even the computer has passed through
stages. This process could be described as innovative process because the
typewriter was an older innovation on documentation but today computer is the
new innovation. This unit will take you through the various stages of innovation.
To have a good startup, you must be innovative.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
• Differentiate the different types of innovations
• Evaluate yourself on your type of innovative ideas using innovative
criteria.
122
3.0 Main Content
Innovation is the process of translating an idea or invention into a good or service
that creates value or for which customers will pay. To be called an innovation, an
idea must be replicable at an economical cost and must satisfy a specific need.
Innovation involves deliberate application of information, imagination and
initiative in deriving greater or different values from resources, and includes all
processes by which new ideas are generated and converted into useful products.
In business, innovation often results when ideas are applied by the company in
order to further satisfy the needs and expectations of the customers.
In a social context, innovation helps create new methods for alliance creation,
joint venturing, flexible work hours, and creation of buyers' purchasing power.
Innovations are divided into two broad categories:
Evolutionary innovations (continuous or dynamic evolutionary innovation) that are
brought about by many incremental advances in technology or processes and
revolutionary innovations (also called discontinuous innovations) which are often
disruptive and new.
Innovation is synonymous with risk-taking and organizations that create
revolutionary products or technologies take on the greatest risk because they
create new markets. Imitators take less risk because they will start with an
innovator's product and take a more effective approach.
Types of Innovation
It is remarkable how many people are under the false assumption that
companies are either innovative or not. This is a very polarizing and simplistic
perspective that does not take into account the different types of innovations that
companies can and do pursue.
For this post, let’s break down innovation into two dimensions: Technology and
Market, which gives us the following 4 types of innovation:
123
Incremental Innovation
Incremental Innovation is the most common form of innovation. It utilizes your
existing technology and increases value to the customer (features, design
changes, etc.) within your existing market. Almost all companies engage in
incremental innovation in one form or another.
Examples include adding new features to existing products or services or even
removing features (value through simplification). Even small updates to user
experience can add value,
Disruptive Innovation
Disruptive innovation, also known as stealth innovation, involves applying new
technology or processes to your company’s current market. It is stealthy in
nature since newer tech will often be inferior to existing market technology. This
newer technology is often more expensive, has fewer features, is harder to use,
and is not as aesthetically pleasing. It is only after a few iterations that the
newer tech surpasses the old and disrupts all existing companies. By then, it
might be too late for the established companies to quickly compete with the
newer technology.
124
There are quite a few examples of disruptive innovation, one of the more
prominent being Apple’s iPhone disruption of the mobile phone market. Prior to
the iPhone, most popular phones relied on buttons, keypads or scroll wheels for
user input. The iPhone was the result of a technological movement that was
years in making, mostly iterated by Palm Treo phones and personal digital
assistants (PDAs). Frequently you will find that it is not the first mover who ends
up disrupting the existing market. In order to disrupt the mobile phone market,
Apple had to cobble together an amazing touch screen that had a simple to use
interface, and provide users access to a large assortment of built-in and third-
party mobile applications.
Architectural Innovation
Architectural innovation is simply taking the lessons, skills and overall technology
and applying them within a different market. This innovation is amazing at
increasing new customers as long as the new market is receptive. Most of the
time, the risk involved in architectural innovation is low due to the reliance and
reintroduction of proven technology. Though most of the time it requires
tweaking to match the requirements of the new market.
In 1966, NASA’s Ames Research Center attempted to improve the safety of
aircraft cushions. They succeeded by creating a new type of foam, which reacts
to the pressure applied to it, yet magically forms back to its original shape.
Originally it was commercially marketed as medical equipment table pads and
sports equipment, before having larger success as use in mattresses. This
“slow spring back foam” technology falls under architectural innovation. It is
commonly known as memory foam.
Radical innovation
Radical innovation is what we think of mostly when considering innovation. It
gives birth to new industries (or swallows existing ones) and involves creating
revolutionary technology. The airplane, for example, was not the first mode of
transportation, but it is revolutionary as it allowed commercialized air travel to
develop and prosper.
The four different types of innovation mentioned here – Incremental, Disruptive,
Architectural and Radical – help illustrate the various ways that companies can
innovate. There are more ways to innovate than these four. The important thing
is to find the type(s) that suit your company and turn those into success.
Self-Assessment Exercises
1. How does innovation differ from invention?
2. Differentiate the different types of innovations
125
Feedback
1. Invention can be defined as the creation of a product or introduction of a
process for the first time. Innovation, on the other hand, occurs if someone
improves on or makes a significant contribution to an existing product,
process or service.
2. Remarkable innovations combine different types!
a. Incremental innovation.
b. Process innovation.
c. Red ocean innovation.
d. Service innovation.
e. Business model innovation.
f. Sustainable innovation.
g. Frugal innovation.
h. Blue ocean innovation
4.0 Conclusion
At a startup be well informed of the different types of innovations, this will guide
the implementation of your idea.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
https://www.hse.ru/pubs/share/direct/document/76780100
Coccia M. (2005). Measuring Intensity of Technological Change: The Seismic
Approach
// Technological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 72, n. 2, pp. 117-144.
Coccia M. (2006). Classifications of Innovations Survey and Future Directions. //
Working Paper CERIS-CNR, Anno 8, N° 2–2006
126
Unit 2 Innovation Theory of Entrepreneurship
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This unit will guide you on innovative theory for entrepreneur. As you read
through the text, think of how you can apply what you read in setting up your
business. Everyone has innovative idea. This is because everyone experience
one challenge or the order. Idea comes while trying to look for ways to resolve
the challenge.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to apply the theories in managing
business
3.0 Main Content
The innovation theory was first advocated by Joseph Schumpeter in 1934. A
dynamic theory of entrepreneurship was first advocated by Schumpeter (1949)
who considered entrepreneurship as the catalyst that disrupts the stationary
circular flow of the economy and thereby initiates and sustains the process of
development.
Schumpeter introduced the concept of innovation as key factor in
entrepreneurship in addition to assuming risks and organizing factors of
production. Schumpeter defined entrepreneurship as ―a creative activityǁ. An
innovator who brings new products or services into economy is given the status
of an entrepreneur. He regards innovation as a tool of an entrepreneur. The
entrepreneur is also viewed as the ‗engine of growth‘ which sees the opportunity
for introducing new products, new markets, new sources of supply, new forms of
industrial organization or for the development of newly discovered resources.
Functions of Innovation
The concept of innovation and its corollary development embraces five functions:
127
i. The introduction of a new product with which consumers are not yet
familiar or introduction of a new quality of an existing product,
ii. The introduction of new method of production that is not yet tested by
experience in the branch of manufacture concerned, which need by no
means be founded upon a discovery scientifically new and can also exist
in a new way of handling a commodity commercially,
iii. The opening of new market that is a market on to which the particular
branch of manufacturer of the country in question has not previously
entered, whether or not this market has existed before,
iv. Conquest of a new source of supply of raw material and
v. The carrying out of the new organization of any industry.
Schumpeter is the first major theorist to put the human agent at the centre of the
process of economic development. He is very explicit about the economic
function of the entrepreneur. The entrepreneur is the prime mover in economic
development; his function, to innovate or carry out new combinations.
Schumpeter makes a distinction between an innovator and an inventor. An
inventor discovers new methods and new materials. On the contrary, an
innovator is one who utilizes or applies inventions and discoveries in order to
make new combinations. An inventor is concerned with his technical work of
invention whereas an entrepreneur converts the technical work into economic
performance. An innovator is more than an inventor because he does not only
originate as the inventor does but goes much farther in exploiting the invention
commercially.
Wilken added the concept of the changes that an entrepreneur brings which
includes:
i. Expansion of goods, products.
ii. Productivity of factors of production such as finance, labour, material.
iii. Innovation in production such as, technology, process changes and
increase in humanresource productivity.
iv. Innovation in marketing area such as the composition of the market, size
of the market and new markets.
According to Schumpeter, entrepreneurs are individuals motivated by a will for
power; their special characteristic being an inherent capacity to select correct
answers, energy, will and mind to overcome fixed talents of thoughts, and a
capacity to withstand social opposition.
The entrepreneur has been the major mover for economic development process.
]
Criticism of Innovation Theory
128
i. The theory seems one-sided as it puts too much emphasis on innovative
functions.
ii. It ignores the risk taking and organizing aspects of entrepreneurship. An
entrepreneur has not only to innovate but also assemble the resources
and put them to optimum use.
iii. It ignored the risk-taking function, which is equally important. When an
entrepreneur develops a new combination of factors of production, there
is enough risk involved.
Observations from the Innovation Theory
The theory supports the ―enterprising spiritǁ of entrepreneur to innovate. It is the
act that endows resources with a new capacity to create wealth. Drucker says,
innovation creates a resource and it is endowed with economic value.
Schumpeter‘s views are particularly applicable to developing countries where
innovations need to be encouraged.
The innovation theory was propounded by Joseph Schumpeter who is regarded
as father of innovation. The innovation theory looks at concept of innovation as
key factor in entrepreneurship in addition to assuming risks and organizing
factors of production. The functions of innovation theory were described and
criticism of the theory was also discussed as one of it is that it ignored the risk-
taking function. Observations from the theory were taken into cognizance.
• Financing Innovation and New Ventures
• Change management
• Technical Change and management of Innovation
Self-Assessment Exercise
In what ways can an Entrepreneur apply the theories of innovation in managing
business?
The following ways may be considered:
i. The introduction of a new product with which consumers are not yet
familiar or introduction of a new quality of an existing product,
ii. The introduction of new method of production that is not yet tested by
experience in the branch of manufacture concerned, which need by no
means be founded upon a discovery scientifically new and can also exist
in a new way of handling a commodity commercially,
iii. The opening of new market that is a market, on to which the particular
branch of manufacturer of the country in question has not previously
entered, whether or not this market has existed before,
iv. Conquest of a new source of supply of raw material and
v. The carrying out of the new organization of any industry.
129
4.0 Conclusion
Innovative theory is a must read for startup because it guides the entrepreneur
on the basic steps to take implementing an idea. Without innovation, there will
be no entrepreneurs. Innovation help fill the gap that exist between current
existence and needs.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Reading
https://www.innosight.com/services/develop-innovation-capabilitie
https://www.cairn.info/revue-journal-of-innovation-economics-2014-2-page-
41.htm
130
Unit 3 Financing Innovation and New Ventures
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Financing activities are transactions with creditors or investors used to fund
either company operations or expansions. These transactions are the third set of
cash activities displayed on the statement of cash flows. Financing innovation is
a dynamic field. Many of the approaches that we may take for granted today,
such as equity financing and venture capital, were once novel and untested. As
time goes on, new business models are evolving to meet the challenges of
developing.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to apply the learned financing techniques
in financing your project.
3.0 Main Content
Sources of Financing for Innovation and New Business Venture
Some important sources of funding for innovation activities include:
• Personal funds.
• Government grants.
• Family and friends.
• Debt.
• Equity.
• Business angels.
• Venture capital.
• Crowd funding.
Many entrepreneurs struggle to find the capital to start a new business. There
are many sources to consider, so it is important for an entrepreneur to fully
explore all financing options. He also should apply for funds from a wide variety
of sources. Personal savings: Experts agree that the best source of capital for
any new business is the entrepreneur‘s own money. It is easy to use, quick to
131
access, has no payback terms, and requires no transfer of equity (ownership).
Also, it demonstrates to potential investors that the entrepreneur is willing to risk
his own funds and will persevere during hard times. Friends and family: These
people believe in the entrepreneur, and they are the second easiest source of
funds to access. They do not usually require the paperwork that other lenders
require.
However, these funds should be documented and treated like loans. Neither part
ownership nor a decision-making position should be given to these lenders,
unless they have expertise to provide.
The main disadvantage of these funds is that, if the business fails and money
goes lost, a valuable relationship may be jeopardized. Credit cards: The
entrepreneur‘s personal credit cards are an easy source of funds to access,
especially for acquiring business equipment such as photocopiers, personal
computers, and printers. These items can usually be obtained with little or no
money paid up front and with small monthly payments. The main disadvantage is
the high rate of interest charged on credit card balances that are not paid off in
full each month. Banks: Banks are very conservative lenders. As successful
entrepreneur Phil Holland explains, ―Many prospective business owners are
disappointed to learn that banks do not make loans to startup businesses unless
there are outside assets to pledge against borrowing.ǁ many entrepreneurs
simply do not have enough assets to get a secured loan from a lending
institution.
However, if an entrepreneur has money in a bank savings account, she can
usually borrow against that money. If an entrepreneur has good credit, it is also
relatively easy to get a personal loan from a bank. These loans tend to be short
term and not as large as business loans. Venture investors: This is a major
source of funding for startups that have a strong potential for growth. However,
venture investors insist on retaining part ownership in new businesses that they
fund. Formal institutional venture funds are usually limited • partnerships in which
passive limited partners, such as retirement funds, supply most of the money.
These funds have large amounts of money to invest. How- ever, the process of
obtaining venture capital is very slow? Several books, such as Galante‘s
Venture Capital & Private Equity Directory, give detailed information on these
funds. Corporate venture funds are large corporations • with funds for investing in
new ventures. These often provide technical and management expertise in
addition to large monetary investments. How- ever, these funds are slow to
access compared to other sources of funds. Also, they often seek to gain control
of new businesses. Angel investors tend to be successful entrepreneurs • who
have capital that they are willing to risk. They often insist on being active advisers
to businesses they support. Angel funds are quicker to access than corporate
venture funds, and they are more likely to be invested in a startup operation. But
they may make smaller individual investments and have fewer contacts in the
banking community. Government programs: Many national and regional
132
governments offer programs to encourage small- and medium-sized businesses.
In the United States, the Small Business Administration (SBA) assists small firms
by acting as a guarantor of loans made by private institutions for borrowers who
may not otherwise qualify for a commercial loan.
Long-term financing sources can be in form of any of the under listed:
• Share Capital or Equity Shares.
• Preference Capital or Preference Shares.
• Retained Earnings or Internal Accruals.
• Debenture / Bonds.
• Term Loans from Financial Institutes, Government, and Commercial
Banks.
• Venture Funding.
• Asset Securitization.
Innovative financing
This refers to a range of non-traditional mechanisms to raise additional funds for
development aid through "innovative" projects such as micro-contributions, taxes,
public-private partnerships and market-based financial transactions.
How do entrepreneurs finance their new ventures? The most successful
entrepreneurs turn to the venture capital industry. The entrepreneur brings fresh
ideas, management skills, and personal commitment while the venture capitalists
(VCs) bring cash. Venture capital is provided by professionals who invest
alongside management in young, rapidly growing companies that have the
potential to develop into significant ventures.
The venture capital industry in the U.S. has grown to a size that could only be
imagined in years past. The venture capital contribution to U.S. jobs, economic
growth, and technological progress has climbed steadily over the last few years.
Questions of how to raise money, when to raise money, and how to work with
venture capitalists are frequent topics of concern with entrepreneurs today. This
unit will describe some common sources of capital, provide information about the
venture capital market, and offer guidance in approaching the venture capitalists
and presenting the business plan.
Growth is an unavoidable fact of successful businesses. Growth due to an
increase in sales requires product; in turn, additional product requires inputs like
labor, inventory, raw materials, plant, property, and equipment. Since internally
generated funds typically won’t meet all expansion needs, most startups depend
on outside capital to finance growth. In some instances, the entrepreneur may
find that the new business does not begin to earn a profit until 2 or 3 years down
the road. The entrepreneur therefore revolves around securing the necessary
capital to pioneer a new venture through the “financial Death Valley” and sustain
the desired growth rate of the venture.
133
Financing the fast-growing venture tends be a time-consuming, complex task to
the entrepreneur—who is most likely working heads-downs on the daily needs.
Typically, financing a new venture employs a combination of debt and equity
financing. Debt is presumed to be lower-risk capital because it is repaid
according to a set schedule of principal and interest. Debt financing involves an
interest-bearing instrument usually called a loan. The payment is only indirectly
related to the sales and profits of the new venture and typically, debt financing
(also known as asset-based financing) requires some asset—for instance a
vehicle, house, or other property/land—that will be used as collateral. Generally,
lenders will allow ventures to borrow against their expected ability to generate the
cash to repay the loan.
The entrepreneur with a new idea for launching a business, and when turned
down by a bank, will often turn to a wealthy individual or several friends to back
the business venture. In the U.S. these “angel investors” commit some $30-60
billion per year in small businesses. But before receiving such “angelic support”
many questions must first be answered. Certain critical elements must be
present in a business plan before the venture will receive financing. And those
who wish to be successful in dealing with outside investors should spend the
time and effort to understand the objectives of their potential investors. Academic
research on this topic has shown that in all too many cases startups don’t get
financed because the entrepreneur is not familiar with an investor’s industry
preferences, requirements, and specialization; risks, protection against losses;
participation in management; or with the investor’s “harvesting options” or “exit
goals.”
A good relationship between the entrepreneur and the venture capitalist is a vital
element in a successful venture. Understanding this partnership is a necessary
first step for the prospective entrepreneur. The entrepreneur must be prepared to
compete successfully for the venture capitalists’ dollars. It will be the task of the
entrepreneur to select and approach the VC, most often with a complete
business plan and strategic focus that supports an oral presentation. The
presentation must demonstrate management’s competence in knowing the
following: (1) earning power/operating cash flows of the venture, (2) the potential
terminal value of the business at exiting, (3) the value of the business model
underlying the venture, (4) industry competitors and competitive advantages, and
(5) how the management team intends to assess risks and create contingency
plans.
When meeting with VCs, the entrepreneurs need to be well prepared and “know
their business numbers cold.” Few analytical terms are more widely used and, at
the same time, more poorly understood than the term cash flow. The cash
flowing into a business venture is not the same as accounting profit. It is
important for entrepreneurs to make weekly and monthly projections of cash
received and disbursed. Such financial forecasts that relate to the future are
134
called financial pro forma. This forecasting procedure is very difficult and perhaps
that is why most entrepreneurs avoid it. As Mark Twain once said: “The art of
prophecy is very difficult, especially with respect to the future.”
Financial management is the cornerstone of the scorekeeping system for these
investing and profit-making activities. A cash flow statement can help the
entrepreneur come up with realistic estimates, determine financial requirements,
understand the financial strategy framework, and craft a fund-raising strategy.
The cash flow statement, also known as the statement of cash flows, is one of
the most important financial planning tools that a startup venture can prepare for
the business plan. It is used to provide the entrepreneur with a clearer insight into
the venture’s cash management strategy: where funds come from and how they
are disbursed; the amount of cash available; the amount of additional funds
needed (AFN) to grow; and the general financial well-being of the new venture.
4.0 Conclusion
While generating business idea, think along the mode of financing such
business. Every business needs finance for startup. You do not necessary need
huge sum of money to start. Your finance startup may require just a portion of
your apartment which could be quantify financially.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
https://www.innovationpolicyplatform.org/content/financing-innovation
Asika, N.M. and Odugbesan, A.O. (2002). Understanding Nigerian Business
Environment. Lagos. Concept Publications Ltd.
AK Gupta, HJ Sapienza Determinants of venture capital firms' preferences
regarding the industry diversity and geographic scope of their investments
Journal of business Venturing 7 (5), 347-362.
135
Unit 4 Change Management
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Change management is the process, tools and techniques to manage the people
side of change to achieve the required business outcome. Change
management incorporates the organizational tools that can be utilized to help
individuals make successful personal transitions resulting in the adoption and
realization of change.
When your organization undertakes projects or initiatives to improve
performance, seize opportunities or address key issues, they often require
changes; changes to processes, job roles, organizational structures and types
and uses of technology. However, it is actually the employees of your
organization who have to ultimately change how they do their jobs. If these
individuals are unsuccessful in their personal transitions, if they don’t embrace
and learn a new way of working, the initiative will fail. If employees embrace and
adopt changes required by the initiative, it will deliver the expected results.
Change management is the discipline that guides how we prepare, equip and
support individuals to successfully adopt change in order to drive organizational
success and outcomes. While all changes are unique and all individuals are
unique, decades of research shows there are actions we can take to influence
people in their individual transitions. Change management provides a structured
approach for supporting the individuals in your organization to move from their
own current states to their own future states.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to manage changes that occur in an
enterprise.
3.0 Main Content
Three Levels of Change Management
136
Individual Change Management
While it is the natural psychological and physiological reaction of humans to
resist change, we are actually quite resilient creatures. When supported through
times of change, we can be wonderfully adaptive and successful.
Individual change management requires understanding how people experience
change and what they need to change successfully. It also requires knowing
what will help people make a successful transition: what messages do people
need to hear when and from whom, when the optimal time to teach someone a
new skill is, how to coach people to demonstrate new behaviours, and what
makes changes “stick” in someone’s work. Individual change management draws
on disciplines like psychology and neuroscience to apply actionable frameworks
to individual change.
After years of studying how individuals experience and are influenced in times of
change, Prosci developed the ADKAR® Model for individual change. Today, it is
one of the most widely used change models in the world.
Organizational/Initiative Change Management
While change happens at the individual level, it is often impossible for a project
team to manage change on a person-by-person basis. Organizational or initiative
change management provides us with the steps and actions to take at the project
level to support the hundreds or thousands of individuals who are impacted by a
project.
Organizational change management involves first identifying the groups and
people who will need to change as the result of the project, and in what ways
they will need to change. Organizational change management then involves
creating a customized plan for ensuring impacted employees receive the
awareness, leadership, coaching, and training they need in order to change
successfully. Driving successful individual transitions should be the central focus
of the activities in organizational change management.
Organizational change management is complementary to your project
management. Project management ensures your project’s solution is designed,
developed and delivered, while change management ensures your project’s
solution is effectively embraced, adopted and used.
Enterprise Change Management Capability
Enterprise change management is an organizational core competency that
provides competitive differentiation and the ability to effectively adapt to the ever-
changing world. An enterprise change management capability means effective
change management is embedded into your organization’s roles, structures,
processes, projects and leadership competencies. Change management
processes are consistently and effectively applied to initiatives, leaders have the
137
skills to guide their teams through change, and employees know what to ask for
in order to be successful.
The end result of an enterprise change management capability is that individuals
embrace change more quickly and effectively, and organizations are able to
respond quickly to market changes, embrace strategic initiatives, and adopt new
technology more quickly and with less productivity impact. This capability does
not happen by chance, however, and requires a strategic approach to embed
change management across an organization
4.0 Conclusion
The society is dynamic. This affect the business environment. Therefore, to
remain relevant in your business, you must work with the changes in the society.
Change affect the taste and needs of individuals. To manage change, you must
recognise the change and find out why the change.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References /Further Readings
https://searchcio.techtarget.com/definition/change-management
https://www.strategy-business.com/article/rr00006?gko=643d0
138
Unit 5 Technical Change and Management of Innovation
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
It has been determined that more successful change managers are those who
have a clear, personal understanding of the pressures on them and their
organisations, as well as a well-developed rationale for what theyare attempting
to achieve and the likely effect of their actions.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to appreciate the role of, and skills
required for, implementing change and innovation
3.0 Main Content
The nature of change and innovation.
Not all changes are of the same order of magnitude. In particular, it is the framing
of change, and people’s sense-making of it, that comes into play in building
effective change and facilitating effective change visions.
Driving change.
The approaches to organisational change that managers need to take into
account when planning for or undertaking technology-induced changes. It builds
on understanding of what it is that forces an organisation to change, by
considering different analytical frameworks for change, followed by a discussion
of how change affects innovation and innovation outcomes.
Diagnosing change.
This considers how to better diagnose change situations in order to select the
appropriate approach to change and
Innovation. There are a range of diagnostic instruments and views relevant to
managing change. We consider questions and answers of how organisations
change, bringing together the process aspects of change.
139
Skills for communicating change. In this Unit we consider the process of building
communication strategy and then communicating successful change.
Organisations implementing change need to signal this intention to change and
create sensitivity to and a sense of urgency for the need to change. Highlighting
different communication strategies, consider ways to increase the awareness of
change by those involved with the implementation of change strategy, new
technology and innovations.
Implementing change: getting ready for change and innovation. Next is to begin
examining the implementation of change. Acknowledge the importance of
learning from past change processes and managing and deriving value from the
organisational knowledge. We look at two ways of segmenting our internal
market for the change. We also examine several characteristics of innovations
and new technologies that have been shown to affect the likelihood of their being
adopted. We also
Analyse the impact of organisational culture and organisational structure.
Implementing change: persuasion, decision, commitment. In the past, change
professionals and managers have assumed that people will rationally choose to
adopt innovations and new technology to replaceoutmoded systems and
technologies. This is often proved to be a false assumption. In this Unit, we look
at the areas of commitment, compliance and resistance; stress, pacing and
celebration. Finally, we consider some of the most powerful persuaders
available: reward and recognition systems.
Implementing change: roll-out and project management. In this we address the
basics of the technical side of the process of roll-out. We cover basics of classic
project management, and discuss several system conversion strategies and the
strengths and weaknesses of each.
Measuring and monitoring change.
The role of the change agent.
We consider how to manage the process of changing an organisation.
Specifically, we refer to the role of the change agent. With this focus, we
establish that this management role demands an understanding of the impact of
changes on the people affected by them. Management of Innovation and
Technical Change Program quality assurance
4.0 Conclusion
We have established that change is critical bur managers need to take into
account when planning for or undertaking technology-induced changes.
140
Management role demands an understanding of the impact of changes on the
people or affected by them
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
https://www.business.unsw.edu.au
Burke W, 2014, Organization Change: Theory and Practice, 4th edn, SAGE
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Burnes B, 2009, Managing Change, 5th edn, Prentice Hall, Harlow.
Kim W C and Mauborgne R, 2005, Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create
Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition Irrelevant, Harvard
Business School Press, Boston.
Lawler E E and Worley C G, 2011, Management Reset: Organizing for
Sustainable Effectiveness, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.
141
Module 6 Family Business and Succession Planning
Unit 1 The Concept of Family Business Contents
Unit 2 The Cultural Contexts of Family Business
Unit 3 Roles and Relationship in Family Business
Unit 4 Ownership Transfer and Succession in Family Business
Unit 1 The Concept of Family Business Contents
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
In this unit, you are going to learn how family business is managed. Also, you
will be able to find answer to whether it is good to have a family business.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this business you will be able to set up and manage family
business.
3.0 Main Content
The Concept of Family Business
A family-owned business may be defined as any business in which two or more
family members are involved and the majority of ownership or control lies within a
family. Family-owned businesses may be the oldest form of business
organization. Farms were an early form of family business in which what we think
of today as the private life and work life were intertwined. In urban settings it was
once normal for a shopkeeper or doctor to live in the same building in which he
or she worked and family members often helped with the business as needed.
142
Since the early 1980s the academic study of family business as a distinct and
important category of commerce has developed. Today family owned businesses
are recognized as important and dynamic participants in the world economy.
According to the U.S. Bureau of the Census, about 90 percent of American
businesses are family-owned or controlled. Ranging in size from two-person
partnerships to Fortune 500 firms, these businesses account for half of the
nation's employment and half of her Gross National Product. Family businesses
may have some advantages over other business entities in their focus on the
long term, their commitment to quality (which is often associated with the family
name), and their care and concern for employees. But family businesses also
face a unique set of management challenges stemming from the overlap of
family and business issues.
Issues in family businesses
A family business can be described as an interaction between two separate but
connected systems—the business and the family—with uncertain boundaries
and different rules. Graphically, this concept can be presented as two
intersecting circles. Family businesses may include numerous combinations of
family members in various business roles, including husbands and wives,
parents and children, extended families, and multiple generations playing the
roles of stockholders, board members, working partners, advisors, and
employees. Conflicts often arise due to the overlap of these roles. The ways in
which individuals typically communicate within a family, for example, may be
inappropriate in business situations. Likewise, personal concerns or rivalries may
carry over into the work place to the detriment of the firm. In order to succeed, a
family business must keep lines of communication open, make use of strategic
planning tools, and engage the assistance of outside advisors as needed.
Employment Qualifications
Many family businesses also have trouble determining guidelines and
qualifications for family members hoping to participate in the business. Some
companies try to limit the participation of people with certain relationships to the
family, such as in-laws, in order to minimize the potential for conflicts. Family
businesses often face pressure to hire relatives or close friends who may lack the
talent or skill to make a useful contribution to the business. Once hired, such
people can be difficult to fire, even if they cost the company money or reduce the
motivation of other employees by exhibiting a poor attitude. A strict policy of only
hiring people with legitimate qualifications to fill existing openings can help a
company avoid such problems, but only if the policy is applied without exception.
If a company is forced to hire a less-than-desirable employee, analysts suggest
providing special training to develop a useful talent, enlisting the help of a non-
family employee in training and supervising, and assigning special projects that
minimize negative contact with other employees.
143
Salaries and Compensation
Another challenge frequently encountered by family businesses involves paying
salaries to and dividing the profits among the family members who participate in
the firm. In order to grow, a small business must be able to use a relatively large
percentage of profits for expansion. But some family members, especially those
who are owners but not employees of the company, may not see the value of
expenditures that reduce the amount of current dividends they receive. This is a
source of conflict for many family firms and an added level of difficulty in making
the necessary investments into the business for continued success. To ensure
that salaries are distributed fairly among family and non-family employees,
business leaders should match them to industry guidelines for each job
description. When additional compensation is needed to reward certain
employees for their contributions to the company, fringe benefits or equity
distributions can be used.
Succession
Another important issue relating to family businesses is succession—determining
who will take over leadership and/or ownership of the company when the current
generation retires or dies. The key to avoiding conflicts about who will take over a
business is having a well-defined plan in place. A family retreat, or a meeting on
neutral ground without distractions or interruptions, can be an ideal setting to
open discussions on family goals and future plans, the timing of expected
transitions, and the preparation of the current generation for stepping down and
the future generation for taking over. When succession is postponed, older
relatives who remain involved in the family firm may develop a preference for
maintaining the status quo. These people may resist change and refuse to take
risks, even though such an attitude can inhibit business growth. The business
leaders should take steps to gradually remove these relatives from the daily
operations of the firm, including encouraging them to become involved in outside
activities, arranging for them to sell some of their stock or convert it to preferred
shares, or possibly restructuring the company to dilute their influence.
Family business leaders can take a number of steps in order to avoid becoming
caught up in these common pitfalls. Having a clear statement of goals, an
organized plan to accomplish the goals, a defined hierarchy for decision-making,
an established plan for succession, and strong lines of communication will help to
prevent many possible problems from arising. All family members involved in the
business must understand that their rights and responsibilities are different at
home and at work. While family relationships and goals take precedence at
home, the success of the business comes first at work.
When emotion intrudes upon work relationships, something that happens in all
businesses from time to time, and the inevitable conflicts between family
members arise, the manager must intervene and make the objective decisions
necessary to protect the interests of the firm. Rather than taking sides in a
144
dispute, the manager must make it clear to all employees that personal
disagreements will not be allowed to interfere with work. This approach should
discourage employees from jockeying for position or playing politics. The
business leader may also find it useful to have regular meetings with family
members, and to put all business agreements and policy guidelines in writing.
The Planning Process
Strategic planning—centering on both business and family goals—is vital to
successful family businesses. In fact, planning may be more crucial to family
businesses than to other types of business entities, because in many cases
families have a majority of their assets tied up in the business. Since much
conflict arises due to a disparity between family and business goals, planning is
required to align these goals and formulate a strategy for reaching them. The
ideal plan will allow the company to balance family and business needs to
everyone's advantage.
Family Planning
In family planning, all interested members of the family get together to develop a
mission statement that describes why they are committed to the business. In
allowing family members to share their goals, needs, priorities, strengths,
weaknesses, and ability to contribute, family planning helps create a unified
vision of the company that will guide future dealings.
A special meeting called a family retreat or family council can guide the
communication process and encourage involvement by providing family
members with a venue to voice their opinions and plan for the future in a
structured way. By participating in the family retreat, children can gain a better
understanding of the opportunities in the business, learn about managing
resources, and inherit values and traditions. It also provides an opportunity for
conflicts to be discussed and settled. Topics brought to family councils can
include: rules for joining the business, treatment of family members working and
not working in the business, role of in-laws, evaluations and pay scales, stock
ownership, ways to provide financial security for the senior generation, training
and development of the junior generation, the company's image in the
community, philanthropy, opportunities for new businesses, and diverse interests
among family members. Leadership of the family council can be on a rotating
basis, or an outside family business consultant may be hired as a facilitator.
Business Planning
Business planning begins with the long-term goals and objectives the family
holds for themselves and for the business. The business leaders then integrate
these goals into the business strategy. In business planning, management
analyzes the strengths and weaknesses of the company in relation to its
145
environment, including its organizational structure, culture, and resources. The
next stage involves identifying opportunities for the company to pursue, given its
strengths, and threats for the company to manage, given its weaknesses. Finally,
the planning process concludes with the creation of a mission statement, a set of
objectives, and a set of general strategies and specific action steps to meet the
objectives and support the mission. This process is often overseen by a board of
directors, an advisory board, or professional advisors.
Assistance in Planning
A professional family business consultant can be a tremendous asset when
confronting planning issues. The consultant is a neutral party who can stabilize
the emotional forces within the family and bring the expertise of working with
numerous families across many industries. Most families believe theirs is the only
company facing these difficult issues, and a family business consultant brings a
refreshing perspective. In addition, the family business consultant can establish a
family council and advisory board and serve as a facilitator to those two groups.
Advisory boards can be established to advise the company's president or board
of directors. These boards consist of five to nine non-family members who meet
regularly to provide advice and direction to the company. They too can take the
emotions out of the planning process and provide objective input. Advisory board
members should have business experience and be capable of helping the
business to get to the next level of growth. In most cases, the advisory board is
compensated in some manner.
As the family business grows, the family business consultant may suggest
different options for the family. Often professional non-family managers or an
outside CEO are recruited to play a role in the future growth of the business.
Some families simply retain ownership of the business and allow it to operate
with few or no family members involved.
The Future of Family Businesses
As Tracy Perman explains in her Business Week article entitled "Taking the
Pulse of Family Business," two broad trends are visible in the realm of family
business as we get comfortable in the 21st Century. First, the aging of the baby
boom generation signals a coming ownership change for many family businesses
within the next ten years. Second, more and more of these businesses will be
taken over by women, continuing a trend that has been visible since the turn of
the century. Perman goes on to highlight some statistics about women owned
family businesses that makes this trend towards female ownership seem quite
positive. Recent studies have shown, Perman explains, that "women-owned
businesses were more likely to focus on succession planning, have a 40 percent
lower rate of family-member attrition, tend to be more fiscally conservative, and
carry less debt than male-owned businesses."
146
Some family-owned businesses are finding that it is no longer assumed that
children will wish to take over a family business. If the founders of a firm wish to
keep it in the family's hands, they should be sure to take proactive measures to
attract future generations to the business.
• Expose family members to all aspects of the business, including
employees, customers, products, and services.
• Define the business's attractive qualities in terms that will appeal to the
listener.
• Recognize those factors that have the potential to dissuade family
members from staying involved in the business. These factors can range
from personal interests that lie in other areas to conflicts with other family
members.
• Reward family members who decide to join or stay with the family
business. The 'price' successors pay to join and operate a family business
may include giving up career options that they find financially and
personally attractive. It may seem to a new family member coming into a
family business that he or she is suffering a loss of privacy. Conflicts may
arise between parent and child when their management styles conflict. A
business may make compromises—such as making it possible for the
successor to spend more time with his or her family or hiring an interim
senior manager to buffer conflicts between parent and child. But the
company's 'cost' and the successor's 'price' must be affordable to both.
• Give family members outlets to explore their ideas, interests, and
concerns.
The rewards of a family-owned business are many as are the challenges. Those
family members who manage the family business should enjoy the business itself
if they are to be successful and pass along a sense of enthusiasm for the
business when the time comes for them to hand over the reins.
4.0 Conclusion
Family businesses may have some advantages over other business entities in
their focus on the long term, their commitment to quality (which is often
associated with the family name), and their care and concern for employees. But
family businesses also face a unique set of management challenges stemming
from the overlap of family and business issues. Strategic planning—cantering on
both business and family goals—is vital to successful family businesses
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
147
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
Gangemi, Jeff, and Francesca Di Meglio. "Making an Educated
Decision." Business Week Online.
from http://www.businessweek.com/smallbiz/content/feb2006/sb20060213_7338
93.htm?campaign_id=search 15 February 2006.
Karofsky, Paul. "Can Business Bring a Family Together?" Business Week. 22
February 2006.
148
Unit 2 The Cultural Contexts of Family Business
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Apart from understanding culture as how it affect our style of living with one
another, it is also important to know how culture can affect your business,
especially in family business. In this unit, you are going to learn more of this.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to describe and manage cultural values in
family business.
3.0 Main Content
Definition of Culture
The elephant tale tells the story of five blind men who, willing to learn, meet the
animal in order to understand it. No one is able to see the animal – after all
they´re all blind –, but they begin to examine the elephant through the four
senses left. Each blind faces a different part of the animal and for each part,
distinct is the interpretation as well. The elephant is comprehended through
diverse perspectives that, although fragmented and far from the animal in its
wholeness, correspond to the individual parts. The tale was used by Mintzberg,
Ahlstrand and Lampel (2010) as a metaphor to understanding the strategy
process. The five blind play the role of humanity, eager to understand but unable
to see the phenomenon in its entirety. In turn, the elephant represents the
strategic process: large, complex and susceptible to various interpretations. It
seems quite appropriate to adapt the metaphor to the culture theme as well. The
focus of the new discipline was, through the study of the different – the native,
non-European, isolated in remote corners of the world –,to understand what
characterizes humanity itself.
Family businesses are one of the dominant entrepreneurial forces in today's
global economy but their poor survival rate is a continuing source of concern all
over the world. They are culture specific and researchers need to consider the
149
way in which culture may be impacting positively or negatively on them as firm's
culture has a relatively weak influence on an individual's core culture beliefs and
value
Organizational culture is an important strategic resource that family firms can use
to gain a competitive advantage. Drawing upon the resource–based view of the
firm, this study examines the association between four dimensions of
organizational culture in family vs. non–family businesses and entrepreneurship.
Using data from 536 U.S. manufacturing companies, the results show a nonlinear
association between the cultural dimension of individualism and
entrepreneurship. Further, there are positive linear relationships between
entrepreneurship and an external orientation, an organizational cultural
orientation toward decentralization, and a long– versus short–term orientation.
With the exception of an external orientation, each of these dimensions is
significantly more influential upon entrepreneurship in family firms when
compared with non–family firms.
However, family businesses, and the nexus of family and work, have recently
become topics of significant preoccupation in the academic literature, owing
largely to changes in the demographic composition of workforces and the
demands that these changes place on the reorganization of all constituencies of
life
The family business is a business governed and/or managed with the intention to
shape and pursue the vision of the business held by a dominant coalition
controlled by members of the same family or a small number of families in a
manner that is potentially sustainable across generations of the family or
families'. Family and family culture are usually deployed to invoke positive
associations of unity, integration, harmony and loyalty. Arguably, the family unit
as the source of belonging and trust can allow the organization to function
collectively for the common good. But again, the family can serve as an arena of
exploitation, in which certain members are exploited. Such exploitation and
inequality may cut across the fault lines of gender, ethnicity, class, disability and
age, among other social categories.
With respect to control, power relations and resistance, family business context
may be rather hierarchical, repressive and paternalistic, representing
contradictions and negative implications for equality and diversity.
4.0 Conclusion
From all intents and purposes, the family business is a business governed with
the objective to shape and pursue the vision of the business held by a dominant
alliance controlled by members of the same family in a manner that is potentially
sustainable across generations of the family. Consequently, family and family
culture are usually deployed to invoke positive associations of unity, integration,
150
harmony and loyalty. Arguably, the family unit as the source of belonging and
trust can allow the organization to function collectively for the common good.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
Gangemi, Jeff, and Francesca DiMeglio. "Making an Educated Decision."
Business Week Online. Available 15 February 2006.
Karofsky, Paul. "Can Business Bring a Family Together?" Business Week. 22
February 2006.
151
Unit 3 Roles and Relationship in Family Business
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
In a family business, every member of the business has a role being you a family
member or not. One may want to know how a member of a family in a family
business may conduct his/her self. In this unit, you will learn how members of
family will behave in handing a family business.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to identify the roles of members in a
family business.
3.0 Main Content
Roles & Relationships
Family is all about relationships. Business is, too. Partner, boss, mentor,
assistant, colleague… and, of course, customers. When family members work
together, however, the roles they have in one setting can be quite different than
the roles they have in the other. This mixing of relationships is one of the reasons
why managing a family business can be such a delicate art. It’s a balance of
emotion and objectivity, of personal and business, of unconditional love and
workplace performance. We already know that relationships take work. That’s
especially true in relationships that do double duty in the family and in the
workplace.
These articles provide information on the ways family members can work
together in businesses, balance the demands of business and family, and create
a happier, healthier family dynamic.
Family Versus Non-Family Employees
There are a number of common issues that most family businesses face at one
time or another. Attracting and retaining non-family employees can be
problematic because such employees may find it difficult to deal with family
conflicts on the job, limited opportunities for advancement, and the special
152
treatment sometimes accorded family members. In addition, some family
members may resent outsiders being brought into the firm and purposely make
things unpleasant for non-family employees. But outsiders can provide a
stabilizing force in a family business by offering a fair and impartial perspective
on business issues. Family business leaders can conduct exit interviews with
departing non-family employees to determine the cause of turnover and develop
a course of action to prevent it.
4.0 Conclusion
Ultimately, family is all about relationships. Business is, too. Partner, boss,
mentor, assistant, colleague… and, of course, customers. When family members
work together, however, the roles they have in one setting can be quite different
than the roles they have in the other. This mixing of relationships is one of the
reasons why managing a family business can be such a delicate art. It’s a
balance of emotion and objectivity, of personal and business, of unconditional
love and workplace performance
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
https://www.anzam.org/wp-content/uploads/pdf-manager/1467_YE_JING-
159.PDF
Bird, B., Welsch, H., Astrachan, J. H., &Pistrui, D. (2002). Family business
research: The evolution of an academic field. Family Business Review, 15(4),
337–350.
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C., & Tight, M. (2001). How to research (2nd ed.).
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Brockhaus, R. (2004). Family business succession: Suggestions for future
research. Family Business Review, 17(2), 165–177
153
Unit 4 Ownership Transfer and Succession in Family Business
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
It comes a time when the business creator or innovator go to the world beyond.
The departure of a business owner could put the business into jeopardy if there
is no adequate arrangement in terms of succession. So, as to be business
owner it is important to know how family businesses are planned to ensure
sustainability.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to plan succession of a family business.
3.0 Main Content
Succession Planning In Family Business
Every business and ownership group will change, but passing a family business
to the next generation is a process fraught with challenges. Family business
leaders face the difficult decisions of when, how and to whom to pass on the
reins with the least harm to business and family.
Contrary to popular assumption this is not a process that happens naturally or
without planning. The succession of family business to the second generation
can leave people feeling uneasy, vulnerable and prone to conflict. This is why it
is critical to give attention to ownership, management, and leadership succession
to make this process less stressful, more manageable and the outcome
successful
Succession Planning
Succession planning involves deciding who will lead the company in the next
generation. Unfortunately, less than one-third of family-owned businesses
survive the transition from the first generation of ownership to the second, and
only 13 percent of family businesses remain in the family over 60 years.
Problems making the transition can occur for any number of reasons: 1) the
154
business was no longer viable; 2) the next generation did not wish to continue
the business, or 3) the new leadership was not prepared for the burden of full
operational control. Lack of planning, however, is by far the most common
underlying reason for a company to fail in the generational transition. At any
given time, a full 40 percent of American firms are facing the succession issue,
yet relatively few make succession plans. Business owners may be reluctant to
face the issue because they do not want to relinquish control, feel their successor
is not ready, have few interests outside the business, or wish to maintain the
sense of identity they have for so long gotten from their work.
But it is vital that the succession process be carefully planned before it becomes
necessary due to the owner's illness or death. Family businesses are advised to
follow a five-stage process in planning for succession: initiation, selection,
education, finance preparation, and transition.
• In the initiation phase, possible successors are introduced to the business
and guided through a variety of work experiences of increasing
responsibility.
• In the selection phase, a successor is chosen and a schedule is
developed for the transition. Analysts almost unanimously recommend
that the successor be a single individual and not a group of siblings or
cousins. To some degree, by selecting a group, the existing leadership is
merely postponing the decision or leaving it to the next generation to sort
out.
• During the education phase, the business owner gradually hands over the
reigns to the successor, one task at a time, so that he or she may learn
the requirements of the position.
• Finance preparation involves making arrangements so that the departing
management team can withdraw funds enough to retire. The more time is
used in preparing for the financial implications of this transition the more
likely a business will be able to avoid being burdened in the process.
• In the transition phase, the business changes hands—the business owner
removes himself or herself from the daily operations of the firm. This final
stage can be the most difficult, as many entrepreneurs experience great
difficulty in letting go of the family business. It helps when the business
owner establishes outside interests, creates a sound financial base for
retirement, and gains confidence in the abilities of the successor.
Estate Planning
Estate planning involves the financial and tax aspects of transferring ownership
of the family business to the next generation. Families must plan to minimize
their tax burden at the time of the owner's death so that the resources can stay
within the company and the family. Unfortunately, tax laws today provide
disincentives for families wishing to continue the business. Heirs are taxed upon
the value of the business at a high rate when ownership is transferred. Due to its
155
complexity, estate planning is normally handled by a team of professional
advisors who include a lawyer, accountant, financial planner, insurance agent,
and perhaps a family business consultant. An estate plan should be established
as soon as the business becomes successful and then updated as business or
family circumstances change.
One technique available to family business owners in planning their estate is
known as "estate freeze." This technique enables the business owner to "freeze"
the value of the business at a particular point in time by creating preferred stock,
which does not appreciate in value, and then transferring the common stock to
his or her heirs. Since the majority of shares in the firm are preferred and do not
appreciate, estate taxes are reduced. The heirs are required to pay gift taxes,
however, when the preferred stock is transferred to them.
A variety of tools are available that can help a business owner defer the transfer
taxes associated with handing down a family business. A basic will outlines the
owner's wishes regarding the distribution of property upon his or her death. A
living trust creates a trustee to manage the owner's property not covered by the
will, for example during a long illness. A marital deduction trust passes property
along to a surviving spouse in the event of the owner's death, and no taxes are
owed until the spouse dies. It is also possible to pay the estate taxes associated
with the transfer of a family business on an installment basis, so that no taxes are
owed for five years and the remainder are paid in annual installments over a ten-
year period. Other techniques exist that allow business owners to exclude some
or all of their assets from estate taxes, including a unified credit/exemption trust,
a dynamic trust, and an annual exclusion gift. Since laws change frequently,
retaining legal assistance is highly advisable.
Step in Planning
1. Establishing Goals & Objectives
Identify the need for a succession plan.
Develop the vision, goals, and objectives of the business.
Determine the importance of family involvement in leadership and ownership of
the company.
Establish personal retirement goals and cash flow needs.
Identify family members’ goals.
Determine the need for an outside facilitator.
Establish team of professional advisors (attorney, CPA, bankers, financial
advisors, insurance specialist).
2. Decision Making
Involve family members in the decision making process.
Establish a method for dispute resolution.
Document the succession plan in writing.
156
Communicate your succession plan to family/stakeholders.
3. Successors
Identify your successors – both managers of the company and owners of the
business.
Identify active and non-active roles for all family members.
Identify required training for the successor(s).
Provide necessary training to the successor to ensure the future of the business.
Will the retiring owner remain involved in the business? If so, define the role.
Provide counsel and support to successors.
4. Estate Planning
Address taxation implications to the owner/business upon sale or transfer of
ownership.
Does your estate have enough liquidity to pay for estate taxes?
Have you considered a buy sell agreement?
Develop estate and personal financial plan for owner, spouse and succeeding
generation.
Provide for active and non-active family members (consider providing non-dealer
related assets to non-active family members). Will non-active family members
receive an equitable share of assets?
5. Consider the Transfer Methods and Corporate Structure
Various options should be generated and considered to address as many family
and business needs as possible. At a minimum, one needs to consider the
following and document your conclusion:
• Method of transfer may include outright purchase, gift/bequest, or a
combination thereon.
• If the business is to be purchased, financing options need to be considered,
including financing from an external party or will the previous owner hold the
loan.
• If the business will be purchased, ensure the business can generate adequate
after-tax cash flows to support debt and interest payments.
• Tax strategies and implications.
• Legal implications.
• Business structure options (e.g. sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
etc.)
• Business agreements.
• Insurance needs (health, life, disability, etc.) have been considered.
6. Contingency Planning
157
Identify potential problem areas.
Dispute/conflict resolution mechanisms have been considered and addressed in
business agreements.
Develop “what if” scenarios including action plans (including possible disability of
yourself and your successor).
Do you have a plan in case you become permanently disabled?
7. Business valuation
Obtain appraisal to determine fair market value of business and real estate.
8. Exit Strategy
Determine method of transfer.
Establish a timeline for implementation of the succession plan.
Publish the plan so that affected individuals are aware.
Communicate regularly with all affected parties.
9. Implementation / Follow-Up
A timetable has been established and is being followed.
Review the plan on a regular basis and update as necessary.
10. Document maintenance
At a minimum, the all the following current documents are maintained in a file:
• Legal will.
• Power of attorney(s).
• Property deeds/titles, leases, rental agreements etc.
• Mortgages and notes payable.
• Tax returns, financial records and financial statements for last five years.
• Bank, brokerage, savings and retirement account information.
• Contact listing of all professional service advisors.
4.0 Conclusion
But it is vital that the succession process be carefully planned before it becomes
necessary due to the owner's illness or death. Family businesses are advised to
follow a five-stage process in planning for succession: initiation, selection,
education, finance preparation, and transition.
In the initiation phase, possible successors should be introduced to the business
and guided through a variety of work experiences of increasing responsibility to
minimize unnecessary rancour at a later stage. Due to its complexity, estate
planning should normally handle by a team of professional advisors who include
158
a lawyer, accountant, financial planner, insurance agent, and perhaps a family
business consultant. An estate plan should be established as soon as the
business becomes successful and then updated as business or family
circumstances change
Discussion Forum
1. Identify and interview an entrepreneur who is running a family business
with focus on planning, succession and management of the business.
Share your findings on the discussion page.
2. On the discussion page, choose two posts by your colleagues, state their
names and analyse their posts with themes – planning, succession and
management of the family business presented.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
www.infoentrepreneurs.org/en/guides/succession-planning-and-business-transfer
https://www.dcu.ie/sites/default/files/centre_for_family_business/Ownership
159
Module 7 Women Entrepreneurship
Unit 1 The Concept of Women Entrepreneurship
Unit 2 Role Orientation and Women Entrepreneurial Aspirations
Unit 3 Contributions of Women to National Socio-Economic and Human
Development
Unit 4 Barriers to Women Entrepreneurial Practice
Unit 1 The Concept of Women Entrepreneurship
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Before now, women were mostly known to be in the kitchen and their kind of
business was only in trading. But today, women have place in business. You
will learn more in this unit.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to describe the concept of women in
business.
3.0 Main Content
Concept and Functions
Women entrepreneur may be defined as a woman or group of women who
initiate, organize, and run a business enterprise. It is based on women
participation in equity and employment of a business enterprise.It is a general
belief in many cultures that the role of women is to build and maintain the homely
affairs like task of fetching water, cooking and rearing children. Since the turn of
the century, the status of women in India has been changing due to growing
industrialization, urbanization, spatial mobility and social legislation. With the
160
spread of education and awareness, women have shifted from kitchen to higher
level of professional activities. Entrepreneurship has been a male-dominated
phenomenon from the very early age, but time has changed the situation and
brought women as today's most memorable and inspirational entrepreneurs. In
almost all the developed countries in the world women are putting their steps at
par with the men in the field of business. Except some Islamic countries of the
world the law of the country has been made in favour of the development of
women entrepreneurship
Kamal Singh who is a woman entrepreneur from Rajasthan, has defined woman
entrepreneur as “a confident, innovative and creative woman capable of
achieving self-economic independence individually or in collaboration, generates
employment opportunities for others through initiating, establishing and running
the enterprise by keeping pace with her personal, family and social life.”
Women Entrepreneur is not different from the concept of Entrepreneur, all the
concept characteristics & functions are applicable to Women Entrepreneur. Role
of women in family & society is changing very fast. Those days are gone where
typically women are expected to look after household activities change in various
social aspect like an equal treatment to women, no discrimination among male &
females availability of equal opportunities to work in any field slowly these
changes have forced her to become more competitive & also encouraged into
business operations.
In nutshell, women entrepreneurs are those women who think of a business
enterprise, initiate it, organize and combine the factors of production, operate the
enterprise and undertake risks and handle economic uncertainty involved in
running a business enterprise.
Functions of Women Entrepreneurs:
As an entrepreneur, a woman entrepreneur has also to perform all the functions
involved in establishing an enterprise. These include idea generation and
screening, determination of objectives, project preparation, product analysis, and
determination of forms of business organization, completion of promotional
formalities, raising funds, procuring men, machine and materials, and operation
of business.
Frederick Harbison (1956) has enumerated the following five functions of a
woman entrepreneur:
1. Exploration of the prospects of starting a new business enterprise.
2. Undertaking of risks and the handling of economic uncertainties involved in
business.
3. Introduction of innovations or imitation of innovations.
4. Coordination, administration and control.
5. Supervision and leadership.
161
The fact remains that, like the definition of the term ‘entrepreneur’, different
scholars have identified different sets of functions performed by an entrepreneur
whether man or women.
All these entrepreneurial functions can be classified broadly into three categories:
(i) Risk-bearing
(ii) Organization
(iii) Innovations
4.0 Conclusion
Women Entrepreneur is not different from the concept of Entrepreneur, all the
concept characteristics & functions are applicable to Women Entrepreneur. It is
a general belief in many cultures that the role of women is to build and maintain
the homely affairs like task of fetching water, cooking and rearing children. But
since the turn of the century, the status of women has been changing due to
growing industrialization, urbanization, spatial mobility and social legislation. With
the spread of education and awareness, women have shifted from kitchen to
higher level of professional activities Role of women in family & society is
changing very fast. So, a woman entrepreneur has also to perform all the
functions involved in establishing an enterprise, initiate it, organize and combine
the factors of production, operate the enterprise and undertake risks and handle
economic uncertainty involved in running a business enterprise
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
162
6.0 References/Further Readings
https://smallb.sidbi.in/step-step-guide-starting-business
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/gender-equality/files/your_rights/self_employed_en.pdf
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano and N. Nunn (2013), “On the Origins of Gender Roles:
Women and the Plough”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, doi:
10.1093/qje/qjt005
Annink, A., L. den Dulk and B. Steijn (2015) “Work-family state support for the
self-employed across Europe”, Journal of Entrepreneurship and Public Policy,
Vol. 4(2), pp. 187–208. doi: 10.1108/jepp-01-2014-0006.
163
Unit 2 Role Orientation and Women Entrepreneurial Aspirations
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
This unit will introduce you to the role of women in business.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to describe the role of women in business.
3.0 Main Content
The dialogue has become too negative, degrading, and hostile toward women.
Too often people in the public sphere, on social media, and in our everyday lives
personally attack women with whom they disagree. By objectifying, mocking,
dismissing, and degrading women’s appearances or backgrounds, they seek to
delegitimize their qualifications and distract from their ideas.All women should be
treated with respect. Fear of being shamed, mocked, or silenced should have no
place in the national debate. Join the movement to encourage respectful,
diverse, and thoughtful conversations. No woman should be afraid to share her
thoughts and beliefs. We encourage everyone to show respect for others who
disagree with them and ask that they be given the same in return.
The only way to achieve real, lasting change is to come together as a unified
force. We have a network of supporters and STAND or ARE ready to take on
anyone who tries to tear down or shut up women.Enterprising new firms drive
economic growth, and women around the world are important contributors to that
growth. As entrepreneurs, they seize opportunities, develop and deliver new
goods and services and, in the process, create wealth for themselves, their
families, communities, and countries. This volume explores the role women
entrepreneurs play in this economic progress, highlighting the challenges they
encounter in launching and growing their businesses, and providing detailed
studies of how their experiences vary from country to country.
Enterprising new firms drive economic growth, and women around the world are
important contributors to that growth. As entrepreneurs, they seize opportunities,
develop and deliver new goods and services and, in the process, create wealth
164
for themselves, their families, communities, and countries. This volume explores
the role women entrepreneurs play in this economic progress, highlighting the
challenges they encounter in launching and growing their businesses, and
providing detailed studies of how their experiences vary from country to country.
Statistics show that businesses owned by women tend to remain smaller than
those owned by men, whether measured by the number of employees or by the
size of revenues. Because women-led firms fail to grow as robustly, the
opportunities to innovate and expand are limited, as are the rewards. Based on
recent studies that examine the links between entrepreneurial supply and
demand issues, this volume provides insights into how women around the world
are addressing the challenges of entrepreneurial growth. The first set of chapters
consists of country overviews and provides discussions of the state of women
growing businesses. The second set of chapters describes research projects
under way in different countries and explores more focused topics under the
umbrella of women business owners and business growth. The volume
concludes with an agenda and projects for future research.
Academics and policymakers will gain a greater understanding of women’s
entrepreneurial behaviours and outcomes through this path-breaking volume.
Those who support women through education and training, policymaking, or
providing entrepreneurial resources will also find the volume of great practical
interest.
4.0 Conclusion
Enterprising new firms drive economic growth, and women around the world are
important contributors to that growth despite their dual responsibilities as family
custodianship. As entrepreneurs, they seize opportunities, develop and deliver
new goods and services and, in the process, create wealth for themselves, their
families, communities, and countries.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/aeae/d6688102051b25852af62eb44ec7961a5a
8f.pdf
165
Bem, SL (1981). A Manual for the Bem Sex Role Inventory. Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychologist Press.
Betz, NE and G Hackett (1981). The relationship of career-related self-efficacy
expectations to perceived.
Kourilsky, ML and WB Walstad (1998). Entrepreneurship and female youth:
Knowledge, attitudes, gender differences, and educational practices. Journal of
Business Venturing, 13, 77–88.
166
Unit 3 Contributions of Women to National Socio-Economic and
Human Development
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Are the contribution of women different from that of men in business? This is the
big question that will be classified in this unit. Before now people attribute some
kind of business to men and others to women. Today, such classification seems
to be giving way. Find out more as your read.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome
By the end of this unit, you will be able to evaluate the role of women in business.
3.0 Main Content
Socio-economic development is the process of social and economic
development in a society. Socio-economic development is measured with
indicators, such as GDP, life expectancy, literacy and levels of employment.The
concern for ‘women in development’ or ‘women progress’ and ‘women
participation’ in national activities as par the men is not only a street slogan in
Nigeria but a governmental struggle and popularised programme.
The contributions of women in National Development were beyond agriculture
and household duties Firstly, the uncertainty of the new urban system which saw
only the men who were known to be the accredited family bread winners
ventured out while women and children remained in the villages to look after the
homes and farms. This earlier contact with the colonial work system put the men
in an advantageous position to acquire all the relevant skills before some women.
Secondly, there was the existing cultural belief that the responsibilities of the
women do not extend beyond the houses, the farm and market. Women who
ventured to project themselves beyond these sectors were suspected to have
easy virtue tendencies and were despised in the communities. This fact also
delayed the education of women or girl children, therefore, seeing them as not
having the necessary skill, to function in the colonial urban system. At that stage
what became known as modern and mechanisms for prop.
167
When it became difficult for the men alone to sustain the family it became
imperative for the woman to earn some income. The port of call due to her lack of
skills and education was the market- for trading while their husbands engaged in
‘government work’. Today in Nigeria for example male nurses are endangered
species. This also applied to teaching which except in the technical colleges and
the universities male teachers are on minority. The delayed incursion of women
into other male dominated jobs such as management positions in the public and
private sectors and lectureship position in University was as a result of socio-
economic prejudices associated with university educated woman. Soon after
women diversified into professional areas such as medicine, law, accountancy,
politics, engineering, power sharing and decision making. Since then women
have never relented but are making waves in all sphares of life. Today, women
are present in all occupations in Nigeria, Africa and the world.Women have
proved very capable of effective representation over the years. What is left is
policy re-thinking to integrate women into the main stream of national decision-
making.
4.0 Conclusion
Even though we have many successful Women Entrepreneurs in our country, but
as we have a male dominated culture there are many challenges which women
entrepreneurs face from family & Society. The role of Women entrepreneur in
economic development is also being recognized and steps are being taken to
promote women entrepreneurship. Resurgence of entrepreneurship is the need
of the hour emphasizing on educating women strata of population, spreading
awareness and consciousness among women to outshine in the enterprise field,
making them realize their strengths, and important position in the society and the
great contribution they can make for their industry as well as the entire economy.
Women entrepreneurship must be moulded properly with entrepreneurial traits
and skills to meet the changes in trends, challenges global markets and be
competent enough to sustain and strive for excellence in the entrepreneurial
arena. Women have proved very capable of effective representation over the
years. What is left is policy re-thinking to integrate women into the main stream of
national decision-making.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
168
6.0 References/Further Readings
file:///C:/Users/May2012/Downloads/363-Article%20Text-627-1-10-20170207.pdf
www.scharticles.com/role-women-education-socio-economic-political-
development/
Afonja, S. (1996). Women and the Political Agenda in Nigerian Keynote Address
Delivered Predrich Ebert Foundations Workshop on popular participation in
Governance, Ikogosi Ekiti, Nigeria, August 16th – 18th.
Agbola T. (1990). Women Self Actualization and the theories of Development
African Urban Quarterly 5 (3 & 4): 107 – 175.
Aweh, B. (2006). Nigerian Women and Political Participation. Enugu. Fourth
Dimension Publishers.
Okoro (1996) Contributions of women to national development. Imo State
example. In Yomi Oruwari (Ed.). Women Development and the Nigerians
Environment Ibadan. Vintage Publisher (Int.) Ltd, Pp 141 – 147.
Onwubiko (2012). Empowerment of Nigerian Women Towards National
Development in Journal of Resourcefulness and distinction volume 2 Vol. 2012.
169
Unit 4 Barriers to Women Entrepreneurial Practice
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Though women are up and doing today in business, there are barriers that still
inhibit their productivity in business. Such barriers will be discuss in this unit.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to solve the foreseen barriers constraining
women in business.
3.0 Main Content
Some of the problems faced by women entrepreneurs
1. Problem of Finance:
Finance is regarded as “life-blood” for any enterprise, be it big or small. However,
women entrepreneurs suffer from shortage of finance on two counts.
Firstly, women do not generally have property on their names to use them as
collateral for obtaining funds from external sources. Thus, their access to the
external sources of funds is limited.
Secondly, the banks also consider women less credit-worthy and discourage
women borrowers on the belief that they can at any time leave their business.
Given such situation, women entrepreneurs are bound to rely on their own
savings, if any and loans from friends and relatives who are expectedly meager
and negligible. Thus, women enterprises fail due to the shortage of finance.
2. Scarcity of Raw Material:
Most of the women enterprises are plagued by the scarcity of raw material and
necessary inputs. Added to this are the high prices of raw material, on the one
hand, and getting raw material at the minimum of discount, on the other. The
170
failure of many women co-operatives in 1971 engaged in basket-making is an
example how the scarcity of raw material sounds the death-knell of enterprises
run by women (Gupta and Srinivasan 2009).
3. Stiff Competition:
Women entrepreneurs do not have organizational set-up to pump in a lot of
money for canvassing and advertisement. Thus, they have to face a stiff
competition for marketing their products with both organized sector and their
male counterparts. Such a competition ultimately results in the liquidation of
women enterprises.
4. Limited Mobility:
Unlike men, women mobility in Nigeria is highly limited due to various reasons. A
single woman asking for room is still looked upon suspicion. Cumbersome
exercise involved in starting an enterprise coupled with the officials humiliating
attitude towards women compels them to give up idea of starting an enterprise.
5. Family Ties:
In Nigeria, it is mainly a women’s duty to look after the children and other
members of the family. Man plays a secondary role only. In case of married
women, she has to strike a fine balance between her business and family. Her
total involvement in family leaves little or no energy and time to devote for
business.
Support and approval of husbands seem necessary condition for women’s entry
into business. Accordingly, the educational level and family background of
husbands positively influence women’s entry into business activities.
6. Lack of Education:
In India, around three-fifths (60%) of women are still illiterate. Illiteracy is the root
cause of socio-economic problems. Due to the lack of education and that too
qualitative education, women are not aware of business, technology and market
knowledge. Also, lack of education causes low achievement motivation among
women. Thus, lack of education creates one type or other problems for women in
the setting up and running of business enterprises.
7. Male-Dominated Society:
Male chauvinism is still the order of the day in India. The Constitution of Nigeria
speaks of equality between sexes. But, in practice, women are looked upon as
weak in all respects. Women suffer from male reservations about a women’s
role, ability and capacity and are treated accordingly. In nutshell, in the male-
171
dominated Indian society, women are not treated equal to men. This, in turn,
serves as a barrier to women entry into business.
8. Low Risk-Bearing Ability:
Women in Nigeria lead a protected life. They are less educated and economically
not self-dependent. All these reduce their ability to bear risk involved in running
an enterprise. Risk-bearing is an essential requisite of a successful entrepreneur.
In addition to above problems, inadequate infrastructural facilities, shortage of
power, high cost of production, social attitude, low need for achievement and
socio-economic constraints also hold the women back from entering into
business.
4.0 Conclusion
Challenges & Problems Women Entrepreneurs Face are enormous but not
insurmountable. Times have changed though, and currently, women are at the
helm of businesses globally despite the challenges they have had to face as
opposed to their male counterparts.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
file:///C:/Users/May2012/Downloads/PDF%20Document.pdf
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/247764795_Barriers_to_Progression_o
f_Women_Entrepreneurs_in_Pakistan
Shabbir, A. & Gregorio, S. (1996). An examination of the relationship between
women’spersonal goals and structural factors. Journal of Business Venturing, 11:
507–30.
Discussion Forum
From your opinion, is there a different between women and men entrepreneurs?
Post your view on the discussion page.
172
Module 8 Social Entrepreneurship
Unit 1 The Concept of Social Entrepreneurship
Unit 2 Social Entrepreneurship and Value Creation
Unit 3 The Roles of Non-governmental Organizations in Social
Entrepreneurship
Unit 4 Social Entrepreneurship and Funding Opportunities
Unit 5 Social Entrepreneurship Enhancement Factors
Unit 1 The Concept of Social Entrepreneurship
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
When you mention entrepreneurship, what easily come to most people mind is
learning a vocation such as baking, cloth making, block making and the like. To
think further some will look at production which might come in form of creativity
and innovation. Services rendered are often kept silent. This is where social
entrepreneurship comes in.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome
By the end of this unit, you will be able to explain the concept of
entrepreneurship.
3.0 Main Content
Social entrepreneurship is the use of startup companies and other entrepreneurs
to develop, fund and implement solutions to social, cultural, or environmental
issues. This concept may be applied to a variety of organizations with different
sizes, aims, and beliefs.
173
Social entrepreneurship is important because it provides a framework for
businesses to find their own success in the pursuit of helping others.
Social entrepreneurship is important because it provides a framework for
businesses to find their own success in the pursuit of helping others. Thus,
business should aim to generate profits and help society.
Types of Social Entrepreneurship
Community Project.
Non-profit Organization.
Co-operative.
Social Enterprise.
Social Purpose Business.
Role and Importance of Social Entrepreneurship for Sustainable Rural
Development
Social economy and social entrepreneurship are a subject of special
consideration, particularly in recent years. This is due to their potential to find
solutions to society’s problems related to the creation of sustainable jobs,
facilitating social and labor integration, provision of social services and improving
the quality of life, including the fight against poverty and social exclusion. The
social enterprise is identified as a key component of the civil society and the
European social model. Social enterprises are an integral part of the wider civil
society and a major component of the social economy sector, which is politically
and financially supported in its entirety by the European policy. Presented study
aims to examine the conditions for development of social entrepreneurship -
framework and peculiarities in development in Bulgaria, focusing on its
opportunities for sustainable rural development in the context of capacity building
and measures to encourage social enterprises and to promote social
entrepreneurship in rural regions for sustainable development. Social
entrepreneurship is discussed as a sustainable business model and a tool to
achieve sustainable development through the opportunities it provides and
approaches through which it addresses social and environmental problems,
reinvesting profits from business activities to achieve goals related to social
transformation and social marketing. The object of study are rural areas to which
sustainable development social entrepreneurship can contribute, seen in the
context of the strategic objectives at European and national level for balanced
and sustainable territorial development, which requires application of new
approaches and instruments in capacity building.
The Importance of Social Entrepreneurship for Development
1. Employment Development
174
The first major economic value that social entrepreneurship creates is the most
obvious one because it is shared with entrepreneurs and businesses alike: job
and employment creation.
2. Innovation / New Goods and Services
Social enterprises develop and apply innovation important to social and
economic development and develop new goods and services. Issues addressed
include some of the biggest societal problems such as HIV, mental ill-health,
illiteracy, crime and drug abuse which, importantly, are confronted in innovative
ways.
3. Social Capital
Next to economic capital one of the m
Most important values created by social entrepreneurship is social capital
(usually understood as “the resources which are linked to possession of a
durable network of ... relationships of mutual acquaintance and recognition").
4. Equity Promotion
Social entrepreneurship fosters a more equitable society by addressing social
issues and trying to achieve ongoing sustainable impact through their social
mission rather than purely profit-maximization.
Self-Assessment Exercise
Why does your business exist – to serve only the shareholders or all the
stakeholders?
Feedback
To make profit?
4.0 Conclusion
Social enterprises should be seen as a positive force, as change agents
providing leading-edge innovation to unmet social needs. Social
entrepreneurship is not a panacea because it works within the overall social and
economic framework, but as it starts at the grassroots level it is often overlooked
and deserves much more attention from academic theorists as well as policy
makers. This is especially important in developing countries and welfare states
facing increasing financial stress.
175
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
(PDF) Role and Importance of Social Entrepreneurship for Sustainable Rural
Development. Available from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/314235830_Role_and_Importance_of_
Social_Entrepreneurship_for_Sustainable_Rural_Development
176
Unit 2 Social Entrepreneurship and Value Creation
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
In this unit, you will learn how value can be created through social
entrepreneurship.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to create value through identified social
entrepreneur.
3.0 Main Content
To start the two extremes of this continuum will be discuss, but focus most of our
discussion on socio-economic value creation, the arena in which both economic
and social value are considered. It is this combined value creation process that
an SROI analysis attempts to measure.
Economic Value
Economic value is created by taking a resource or set of inputs, providing
additional inputs or processes that increase the value of those inputs, and
thereby generate a product or service that has greater market value at the next
level of the value chain. Examples of economic value creation may be seen in
the activities of most for-profit corporations, whether small business, regional or
global. Measures of economic value creation have been refined over centuries,
resulting in a host of econometrics, including return on investment, debt/equity
ratios, price/earnings and numerous others. These measures form the basis for
analyzing most economic activity in the world.
Social Value
Social Value is created when resources, inputs, processes or policies are
combined to generate improvements in the lives of individuals or society as a
whole. It is in this arena that most nonprofits justify their existence, and
unfortunately it is at this level that one has the most difficulty measuring the true
value created. Examples of social value creation may include such “products” as
177
cultural arts performances, the pleasure of enjoying a hike in the woods or the
benefit of living in a more just society. To quote J. Gregory Dees again, Social
Value is “about inclusion and access. It is about respect and the openness of
institutions. It is about history, knowledge, a sense of heritage and cultural
identity. Its value is not reducible to economic or socio-economic terms”. Social
value can be found in anti-racism efforts, some aspects of community organizing,
animal rights advocacy and folk art. It has intrinsic value, but can be difficult to
agree upon or quantify.
Frameworks for the Measurement of Socio-Economic Value
We have already stated that measures of economic value are standardized and
support the basis for most economic activity in the world. And we have also
acknowledged that in the social value arena there are factors that are indeed
beyond measurement, yet clearly are of value and worth affirming. In between
these two poles of value creation lies socio-economic value.
Socio-economic value builds on the foundation of economic value creation by
attempting to quantify and incorporate certain elements of social value. An entity
creates socio-economic value by making use of resources, inputs, or processes;
increasing the value of these inputs, and by then generating cost savings for the
public system or environment of which the entity is a part. These cost savings are
potentially realized in decreased public dollar expenditures and partially in
increased revenues to the public sector, in the form of additional taxes.
Examples of activities that generate socio-economic value are supported
employment programs for the disabled or homeless, job training programs or
other initiatives that provide employment for those presently receiving public
support and divert individuals away from public systems and toward private
markets. We posit that value creation in this arena can be measured using a
social return on investment metric, social earnings calculations and other
evolving metrics. While not the focus of REDFworkshop.org, variations on an
SROI metric may also be applied to environmental, educational and other areas
of interest and activity to the nonprofit sector.
In this context, it is important to understand that the core SROI analysis does not
attempt to definitively quantify and capture all aspects of the benefits and value
that accrue as a result of a successful program, but rather to identify direct,
demonstrable cost savings or revenue contributions that result from that
intervention. And, with that documentation in place, an SROI analysis argues that
the nonprofit should be at least partially compensated and/or credited for the
value it creates in the marketplace. Public sector “pay for performance” and other
trends are a move in this direction, but need to be taken one step further, with
social impacts being tied back to the “investment” required to achieve such
impacts.
178
While the SROI framework presented on this site focuses primarily upon the
creation of metrics by which to quantify socio-economic value, the reader should
note that there are additional efforts to track much more than the value of cost
savings to the public system. Some sorial enterprises are also tracking an array
of other factors including such challenging areas as shifts in personal self-esteem
— factors that fall mainly within the category of social value.
In the same way that an informed investor does not simply look at a single
number in order to understand the worth of a particular investment, REDF
encourages those involved in the application of an SROI analysis to seek out and
use other tools with which to understand the value being created by a particular
organization in which one has invested or is considering an investment. By
combining a socio-economic measure of value with other measures, one may
then begin to understand the full return being leveraged for participants,
stakeholders and society at large.
Finally, an SROI analysis is not simply a traditional form of cost/benefit analysis
documenting that for every dollar spent on “X,” “Y” number of dollars are saved.
Rather, it analyzes both the cost savings generated by any given social program
and the effects of investing limited “social funds” in one form of social activity as
opposed to another, with varying costs of capital. The REDF SROI analysis
potentially may include views of both the cost of that investment and the relative
return generated by competing investment opportunities in the nonprofit capital
market.
Social return on investment (SROI) is a principles-based method for
measuring extra-financial value (i.e., environmental and social value not currently
reflected in conventional financial accounts) relative to resources invested. It can
be used by any entity to evaluate impact on stakeholders, identify ways
to improve performance, and enhance the performance of investments.
What factors go into calculating social return on investment (SROI)?
By Jean Folger
Social return on investment (SROI) is a method for measuring values that are not
traditionally reflected in financial statements, including social, economic and
environmental factors, which can identify how effectively an organization uses its
capital and other resources to create value for the community. While a
traditional cost-benefit analysis is used to compare different investments or
projects, SROI is used more to evaluate the general progress of certain
developments, showing both the financial and social impact of the corporation.
SROI is useful to corporations because it can improve program management
through better planning and evaluation; increase the corporation’s understanding
of their impacts; and allow better communication regarding the value of the
corporation’s work (both internally and to external stakeholders).
179
Philanthropists, venture capitalists, foundations and other non-profits may use
SROI to monetize the social impact, in financial terms.
A general formula used to calculate SROI is as follows:
SROI = (social impact value – initial investment amount) / initial investment
amount *100%
Assigning a dollar value to the social impact can present problems, and various
methodologies have been developed to help quantify impact. The Analytical
Hierarchy Process (AHP), for example, is one method that converts and
organizes qualitative information into quantitative values.
While the approach varies depending on the program that is being evaluated,
there are four main elements that are needed to measure SROI:
• Inputs – resources investment in your activity (such as the costs of
running a job readiness program)
• Outputs – the direct and tangible products from the activity (for example,
the number of people trained)
• Outcomes – the changes to people resulting from the activity (i.e., new
jobs, better income, improved quality of life for the individuals; increased
taxes and reduced support for the government)
• Impact – the outcome less an estimate of what would have happened
anyways (for example, if 20 people got new jobs but 5 of them would have
anyways, the impact is based on the 15 people who got jobs as a result of
the job readiness program)
4.0 Conclusion
Socio-economic value builds on the foundation of economic value creation by
attempting to quantify and incorporate certain elements of social value. An entity
creates socio-economic value by making use of resources, inputs, or processes;
increasing the value of these inputs, and by then generating cost savings for the
public system or environment of which the entity is a part. These cost savings are
potentially realized in decreased public dollar expenditures and partially in
increased revenues to the public sector, in the form of additional taxes.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
180
6.0 References/Further Readings
http://www.fuqua.duke.edu/centers/case/documents/dees_sedef.pdf
https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:827007/FULLTEXT01.pdf
Sen, P. (2007). Ashoka's big idea: Transforming the world through social
entrepreneurship. Futures, 39(5), 534–553. doi:10.1016/j.futures.2006.10.013
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a
Field of Research. The Academy of Management Review, 25(1), 217.
doi:10.2307/259271
181
Unit 3 The Roles of Non-governmental Organizations in Social
Entrepreneurship
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Services are not only rendered by individuals. Services can also be rendered by
government and non-governmental organisations. In this unit, you are going to
learn about social entrepreneurship as provided by non-governmental
organisations.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to create social entrepreneurship from
non-governmental organisations.
3.0 Main Content
Why NGOs Should Care About Social Entrepreneurship
Perhaps the most important question about social entrepreneurship for NGOs to
ask is why Entrepreneurs should be interested in social entrepreneurship to
begin with?
If the answer to this question remains unclear, then an NGO that tries to
incorporate social enterprise into their work is merely following a current trend.
Therefore, a next step for an NGO interested in social entrepreneurship is to
determine just what potential benefits it could bring. For this reason, we have
listed several of the largest and most common benefits of social entrepreneurship
for NGOs below:
Financial sustainability and autonomy.
As mentioned in the introduction to this paper, social entrepreneurship can lead
to programs, products or services that provide new revenue streams for an
organization.
In addition, since this revenue is not donor-provided, it is discretionary, and can
provide greater financial autonomy for an organization.
182
Both financial autonomy and development of a mass base as key features NGOs
should seek to increase their political development capacity.
Reduction in costs of already-provided services.
Not all social enterprise has to be providing something new, and can be just as
beneficial if it takes an old method of service delivery and improves upon its
efficiency and/or reduces its cost. A popular example of social entrepreneurship
applied to a pre-existing program is the use of microfinance in malaria net
distribution programs in Africa and India, which did not change the nets or the
expected health outcome, but instead found a more efficient way to get nets to
those who truly valued them in multiple remote locations at once.
Innovations in management and organizational structure.
Like any sector, there is a predominant culture to NGDOs and the professionals
that run them. Traditionally this has been a culture that contrasts with the culture
of the private-sector. However, social entrepreneurship has shown that there are
potential benefits and innovations for an organization that incorporates some
lessons from the private sector.
A stronger connection to the local economy
Fisher argues that NGOs’ involvement in private sector development, specifically
microenterprises, can have two important benefits for local society. First, she
argues for “the habits of participation and empowerment necessitated by creating
a business feed back into the political system.” Second, she believes that “this
convergence between NGOs and informal for-profit enterprises offers some
promise for building a different model of society from that found in the developed
countries, since profits generated within this new non-profit—for-profit nexus are
invested in public as well as private goods and services.
4.0 Conclusion
Not all social enterprise has to be providing something new, and can be just as
beneficial if it takes an old method of service delivery and improves upon its
efficiency and/or reduces its cost.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
183
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
Marc Lindenberg and Coralie Bryant, Going Global: Transforming Relief and
Development NGOs. Kumarian Press
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/19420676.2011.606331
http://run.unl.pt/bitstream/10362/11786/1/Mannebach_2014.pdf
184
Unit 4 Social Entrepreneurship and Funding Opportunities
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
Where does the social entrepreneur get money to start business? Lack of fund
has affected most social entrepreneurs. This unit will take you through the
funding opportunities for social entrepreneur.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to identify the various opportunity through
which a social entrepreneur can get fund.
3.0 Main Content
If you are looking for funding to help you get your social enterprise up and
running, there are a number of organisations who offer grants to social
enterprises, charities and community projects as well as organisations who are
offering social investment. There are links that bring together details
of many organisations that offer this type of support. As such sources of funding
often change, the list you see is intended only as a starting point and is not a
definitive list. The key is to view the funding of social enterprises as a problem of
financial structuring. If they treat charitable donations as a form of capital that
seeks social, not financial, returns, organizations can then tap traditional sources
of funding: venture capital firms, banks, mutual funds, bonds, and so on.
A New Approach to Funding Social Enterprises
A growing number of social entrepreneurs and investors realize that social
enterprises of all sorts can generate financial returns that will make them
attractive to the right investors
Innovation in Practice
Some of the more forward-thinking foundations and social investors have
realized that the current methods of financing social enterprises are inefficient,
185
for the enterprises and themselves, and have started working to broaden the
access to capital. Here are some of the mechanisms they’re employing.
Loan guarantees.
The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation now issues loan guarantees, rather than
direct funds, to some of the enterprises it supports, recognizing that this is an
efficient way to leverage its donations and provide organizations with more-
certain funding. Its first guarantee allowed a charter school in Houston to raise
$67 million in commercial debt at a low rate, saving the school (and its donors)
almost $10 million in interest payments.
Quasi-equity debt
Some organizations have developed financial vehicles that combine the
properties of equity and debt. A quasi-equity debt security is particularly useful
for enterprises that are legally structured as nonprofits and therefore cannot
obtain equity capital. Such a security is technically a form of debt, but it has an
important characteristic of an equity investment: Its returns are indexed to the
organization’s financial performance. The security holder does not have a direct
claim on the governance and ownership of the enterprise, but the terms and
conditions of the loan are carefully designed to give management incentives to
operate the organization efficiently. Social investors purchase these securities,
which perform the function of equity and make it possible for social enterprises to
offer banks and other profit-seeking lenders a competitive investment
opportunity.
Pooling
Techniques that involve pooling funds have also opened new financial doors to
social enterprises, because the pooling institution can tailor its liabilities to the
needs of different kinds of investors. The Switzerland-based social capital
investor Blue Orchard, for example, assembles portfolios from many micro-
lenders and bundles them into three tranches. The bottom tranche is Blue
Orchard’s equity, which offers high returns but takes the first loss. The next
tranche offers a lower expected return but has less risk. It takes the second loss,
after equity is wiped out, and is analogous to a convertible bond. The top tranche
promises a low but relatively safe return; it is purchased by conventional debt
investors. The pooling model has spread globally, with innovators such as IFMR
Trust, in Chennai, engaged in the securitization and structured finance of
microfinance loan portfolios in which they retain an investment share.
Social impact bonds.
Another innovation, the social impact bond, deserves special notice for its ability
to help governments fund infrastructure and services, especially as public
186
budgets are cut and municipal bond markets are stressed. Launched in the UK in
2010, this type of bond is sold to private investors who are paid a return only if
the public project succeeds—if, say, a rehabilitation program lowers the rate of
recidivism among newly released prisoners. It allows private investors to do what
they do best: take calculated risks in pursuit of profits.
Making It Happen
If the financial crisis taught us one thing, it’s that the machinery and infrastructure
of financial markets matter a lot. Without standards and ratings, investors can’t
distinguish between good investments and bad ones, and lawmakers can’t
provide frameworks to regulate and protect investors and companies alike.When
it comes to evaluating a social enterprise, the challenge is doubled. In many
areas the market machinery and infrastructure for evaluating social risks and
returns are barely developed. This can have two effects: It can starve good
organizations of funding and leave investors focused solely on financial returns.
As Harvard Business School’s Robert Kaplan and Allen Grossman argued ,
investments in social causes will remain chronically inefficient unless the social
sector comes up with transparent ways to measure, report, and monitor social
outcomes. Recognizing the need for such transparency, the Rockefeller
Foundation joined with many of the most important social venture investors in
launching a major effort to finance the development of institutional machinery and
infrastructure for social enterprise capital markets….
Effective financial engineering could unlock those endowment assets and also
attract some of the trillions of dollars currently held in mainstream portfolios. The
ability to tap these deep pools of capital will be a significant contribution to
creating a greener, healthier, and more equitable world.
A version of this article appeared in the January–February 2012 issue of Harvard
Business Review.
4.0 Conclusion
If you are looking for funding to help you get your social enterprise up and
running, there are a number of organisations who offer grants to social
enterprises, charities and community projects as well as organisations who are
offering social investment. There are links that bring together details of many
organisations that offer this type of support. As such sources of funding often
change, the list you see is intended only as a starting point and is not a definitive
list. The key is to view the funding of social enterprises as a problem of financial
structuring. If they treat charitable donations as a form of capital that seeks
social, not financial, returns, organizations can then tap traditional sources of
funding: venture capital firms, banks, mutual funds, bonds, and so on.
187
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
https://www2.fundsforngos.org/category/social-entrepreneurship/
https://www.the-sse.org/resources/.../what-funding-is-available-for-social-
entrepreneur
188
Unit 5 Social Entrepreneurship Enhancement Factors
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
In the last units, you have learned about social entrepreneurship. There are
several benefits of social entrepreneurship to the nation. Sustaining social
entrepreneurship needs enhancement. From your opinion, is it possible to
enhance social entrepreneurship? Jot down your opinion and compare as you
read through this unit.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to identify factors that can enhance social
entrepreneurship.
3.0 Main Content
Factors that lead a person towards the social business:
Internal Environmental Factors
• Uncertainty & Risk
• Funding & Resources
•Management Efficiency
External Environmental Factors
• Non-profit organizations
• New Opportunities & Innovations
• Social welfare & Value
• Community entrepreneurship
• Social change agents
• Institutional entrepreneurs
• Social ventures
•Social enterprises
189
Personal Factors
• Leadership Quality
• Knowledge and Education
• Skills and Experiences
•Entrepreneurial Ability
• Social innovation capabilities
•Enthusiasms and willingness
•Human Character
4.0 Conclusion
Social entrepreneurs are visionaries who try to bring about positive change in the
society by practically applying their social entrepreneurship ideas and strategies
to resolve social problems in the society. There are many factors that hinder
progression. These problems are vast and diverse in nature. They are threats not
only limited to a community or region, but they are global in nature, some of the
common social issues and problems are-inadequate education and health
facilities and system, environmental threats, declining and inefficient political
systems and governance, poverty, unemployment, inequality based on gender
caste and creed; increase in crime rates and so on. They need to be properly
addressed for the realization of the relevant goals.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
http://gsdl.easternuni.edu.bd/greenstone/collect/7eufacultypub/index/assoc/HAS
H0139.dir/doc.pdf
https://thejournalofbusiness.org/index.php/site/article/download/130/129
190
Module 9 Business Opportunity Evaluation
Unit 1 Sources of Business Opportunities in Nigeria
Unit 2 The difference between Ideas and Opportunities
Unit 3 Scanning Business Opportunities in Nigeria
Unit 4 Environment and New Venture Idea Generation
Unit 1 Sources of Business Opportunities in Nigeria
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
There is usually confusion that sets in when developing a business idea. You
want to know which business idea would sell and the one that will not. To work
on an idea requires evaluation of the available opportunities. In this unit, you will
learn how to carry out such evaluation.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome
By the end of this unit, you will be able to evaluate different business
opportunities.
3.0 Main Content
Concept of Business Opportunity
A business opportunity involves sale or lease of any product, service, equipment,
etc. that will enable the purchaser-licensee to begin a business.
Nigeria is fast developing and there is a huge need for innovative products. If you
are resident in Nigeria, kindly reflect on the position of Nigeria ten years back and
compare it with her present state; you will agree with me that there is a huge
change.
191
Ways to identify more business opportunities
1. Listen to your potential clients and past leads. When you're targeting
potential customers listen to their needs, wants, challenges and
frustrations with your industry. ...
2. Listen to your customers. ...
3. Look at your competitors. ...
4. Look at industry trends and insights
To be successful entrepreneurs we need to be continually innovating and looking
for opportunities to grow our business. But how do you find new opportunities to
take your business to new markets and growth levels? Here are four ways to
identify more business opportunities.
1. Listen to your potential clients and past leads
When you’re targeting potential customers listen to their needs, wants,
challenges and frustrations with your industry. Have they used similar products
and services before? What did they like/dislike? Why did they come to you?
What are their objections with your products or services? This will help you to
find opportunities to develop more tailored products and services, hone your
target market and identify and overcome common objections.
2. Listen to your customers
When you’re talking to your customers listen to what they saying about your
industry, products and services. What are their frequently asked questions?
Experiences? Frustrations? Feedback and complaints? This valuable customer
information will help you identify key business opportunities to expand and
develop your current products and services.
3. Look at your competitors
Do a little competitive analysis (don’t let it lead to competitive paralysis though!)
to see what they doing and more importantly not doing? Where are they falling
down? What are they doing right? What makes customers go to them over you?
Analyzing your competitors will help you identify key business opportunities to
expand your market reach and develop your products and services.
4. Look at industry trends and insights
Subscribe to industry publications, join relevant associations, set Google alerts
for key industry terms and news and follow other industry experts on social
media. Absorb yourself in your industry and continually educate yourself on the
latest techniques and trends.
192
How do you evaluate a business opportunity?
Writing a business plan and weighing all relevant factors can help you
better plan your entry into new areas
1. Evaluate your market.
2. Study the business' financials from the past several years to measure
potential earning power. ...
3. Examine your own finances.
4. Look at industry trends.
5. Consider your competition.
Sources of Business Ideas
Personal Skills and Experience
Over half of the ideas for successful businesses come from experiences in the
work place, e.g. a mechanic with experience in working for a large garage who
eventually sets up his/her own car repair or a used car business. Thus, the
background of potential entrepreneurs plays a crucial role in the decision to go
into business as well as the type of venture to be created. Your skills and
experience are probably your most important resource, not only in generating
ideas but also in capitalizing on them.
Franchises
A franchise is an arrangement whereby the manufacturer or sole distributor of a
trademark, product or service gives exclusive rights for local distribution to
independent retailers in return for their payment of royalties and conformity to
standardized operating procedures. Franchising may take several forms, but the
one of interest is the type that offers a name, image, method of doing business
and operating procedures.
In the 1980s and early franchising experienced tremendous growth, becoming a
much- used method of going into business for the millions of enterprises that
were starting up in the USA and Europe. In the USA alone, there are over 2,000
types of franchise businesses, accounting for over US$300 billion in annual sales
revenue and about a third of all retail sales. Apart from buying a franchise, one
can also develop and sell a franchise concept. There are many directories and
handbooks as well as associations, including the International Franchise
Association, which can provide further information.
Mass Media
The mass media is a great source of information, ideas and often
opportunity. Newspapers, magazines, television, and nowadays the Internet are
193
all examples of mass media. Take a careful look, for example, at the commercial
advertisements in newspaper or magazine and you may well find businesses for
sale. Well, one way to become an entrepreneur is to respond to such an offer.
Articles in the printed press or on the Internet or documentaries on television may
report on changes in fashions or consumer needs. For example, you may read
or hear that people are now increasingly interested in healthy eating or physical
fitness. You may also find advertisements calling for the provision of certain
services based on skills, for example accounting, catering or security. Or you
may discover a new concept for which investors are required, such as a
franchise.
Exhibitions
Another way to find the ideas for a business is to attend exhibitions and trade
fairs. These are usually advertised on the radio or in newspapers; by visiting
such events regularly, you will not only discover new products and services, but
you will also meet sales representatives, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors
and franchisers. These are often excellent sources of business ideas, information
and help in getting started. Some of them may also be looking for someone just
like you.
Surveys
The focal point for a new business idea should be the customer. The needs and
wants of the customer, which provide the rational for a product or service, can be
ascertained through a survey. Such a survey might be conducted informally or
formally by talking to people – usually using a questionnaire or through interviews
– and/or through observation. You may start by talking to your family and friends
to find out what they think is needed or wanted that is not available. Or, for
example, whether they are dissatisfied with an existing product or service and
what improvements or changes they would like to see. You can then move on
and talk to people who are part of the distribution chain that is manufacturers,
wholesalers, distributors, agents and retailers.
It would be useful to prepare beforehand a set of questions which might be put
on a questionnaire or used in an interview. Given their close contact with
customers, channel members have a good sense of what is required and what
will not sell. Finally, you should talk to as many customers as possible – both
existing and potential customers. The more information you can get from them,
the better. Besides talking to people, you could also get information through
observation. For example, in deciding whether to open a shop on a particular
street, you can observe and count the number of people going past on given
days and besides talking to people, you can also get information through
observation. For example, in deciding whether to open a shop on a particular
street, you can observe and count the number of people going past on given
days and compare these to other sites. Or, if you are interested in an area
194
frequented by tourists, you may be able to set up or market products from a craft
business. Or you may have noticed that there is no decent restaurant or hotel on
a tourist route or in a given town. One way of ensuring that you are not negligent
in this area is to be alert at all times to needs and opportunities to do business.
One entrepreneur apparently went round at every cocktail party asking if anyone
was using a product that did not adequately fulfil its intended purpose. Another
monitored the toys of a relative’s children looking for ideas for a market ruche.
Complaints
Complaints and frustrations on the part of customers have led to many a new
product or service. Whenever consumers complain bitterly about a product or
service, or when you hear someone say ‘I wish there was … “or “If only there
were a product/service that could … “, you have the potential for a business idea.
The idea could be to set up a rival firm offering a better product or service, or it
might be a new product or service which could be sold to the firm in question
and/or to others.
Brainstorming
Brainstorming is a technique or creative problem-solving as well as for
generating ideas. The object is to come up with as many ideas as possible. It
usually starts with a question or problem statement. For example, you may ask
“What are the products and services needed in the home today which are not
available?” Each idea leads to one or more additional ideas, resulting in a good
number.
When using this method, you need to follow these four rules:
• Don’t criticize or judge the ideas of others
• Freewheeling is encouraged – ideas that seem to be wild or crazy are
welcome
• Quantity is desirable – the greater the number of ideas, the better
• Combine and improve upon the ideas of others.
Reasons for generating business ideas:
• Business idea generation is a sine-qua-non (inevitable) for business.
• Ideas are generated to respond to market needs
• Ideas are also generated to respond to changing fashions and
requirements.
• In order to stay ahead of competition
• To be in tune with latest technology so as to do things better.
• In response to product life cycle
• In order to spread risk and allow for failure.
195
4.0 Conclusion
To be successful entrepreneurs we need to be continually innovating and looking
for opportunities to grow our business. This will help you to find opportunities to
develop more tailored products and services, hone your target market and
identify and overcome common objections.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
https://essay.utwente.nl/65076/1/Bolt_MA_MB.pdf
https://www.profitableventure.com/sources-of-business-ideas
196
Unit 2 The difference between Ideas and Opportunities
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
What is the difference between ideas and opportunities? You have the idea, do
you have the opportunity? You will find answers to these questions in this unit.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to differentiate between business ideas
and opportunities.
3.0 Main Content
One of the most important questions an entrepreneur should ask: Idea or
Opportunity?
According to my mother-in-law, my wife invented the pet rock. As a child she
would adopt a pebble and look after it, just like they did with those pet rocks a
decade later. She had the idea before the inventor! You have probably met
someone with a story about how they had an idea, years ago, that someone else
later turned into a successful product. If they genuinely think that they could have
hit the big time they likely don’t know the difference between an opportunity and
an idea. Don’t get me wrong – ideas are important. They are the creative
lifeblood of your business. People that generate lots of ideas are good at coming
up with solutions to problems. However, an idea is not an opportunity. Here are
just five of the differences:
1. Ideas are cheap. Opportunities have value.
2. Ideas just take inspiration. Opportunities need perspiration too.
3. You can work on lots of ideas at once but should focus on only one or two
opportunities.
4. When dealing with ideas it’s OK to dream, to speculate. When dealing with
opportunities get ready to measure, to use data.
5. Investors do not put their money into ideas. They back opportunities.
197
From Idea to Opportunity
Turning an idea into an opportunity is a process. It takes time, resources and
hard work. It helps to think of it in terms of The Recipe for Business Success.
You can take an idea, from a secret pickling recipe to space tourism, and use the
five elements of The Recipe to start turn it into an idea.
1. Strategic Fit. To have an opportunity the market needs to want what
you have and you need to be able to provide it.
2. Business Plan. The process of writing a business plan actually helps
develop an idea into an opportunity. It forces you to ask and answer
hard questions and explore your options.
3. Team. An idea rarely becomes an opportunity without a team. No
individual has all the knowledge and skills necessary to make the
transformation.
4. Leadership. Once you have a team, the right leadership is essential to
guide the development from idea to opportunity.
5. Resources. The planning process will have given you a good idea of
the resources that will be required to turn your idea into an opportunity.
Successful entrepreneurs are good at turning ideas into opportunities. They act.
They execute. As things turned out my wife did not develop her love of pebbles
into the Next Big Thing. Startups may fail and even tall businesses may fall.
While there are many factors that decide the fate of big and small companies,
identifying ideas and opportunities is what makes it worthwhile to run a business.
Let us try to understand the difference. An idea is like a seed, an impression of a
concept or a notion that revolves around seemingly successful product or
service. A thought that needs some amount of commercial validation before it
shapes self into an opportunity. Opportunity is the care and nurturing that a
gardener has to endeavour for to turn the seed into a sapling and then allow it to
grow into a tall tree. The gardener ensures that it gets good soil, sunshine,
proper environment and protection from harsh rains or weather conditions.
A business idea may not necessarily be a business opportunity; one needs to
filter and sift through these ideas to realize whether they are real opportunities.
Most of the times, these ideas remain dormant because of the lack of courage,
resources, time and money or mere inability to take action. And those who show
courage to take action generally see their dreams go off track due to lack of far
sighted vision or lack of preparedness. The business owner or the management
must own the responsibility of its success or failure regardless of the
circumstances. Successful entrepreneurs are good at turning ideas into
198
opportunities. They act. They execute to make it all happen. It takes time,
resources and hard work. The canvas to paint your idea is large and enormous.
You can take an idea from a secret preserving recipe to space tourism, and use
the basic elements of the recipe to turn ideas into tangible opportunities that
further allow you to make work plans
4.0 Conclusion
A business idea may not necessarily be a business opportunity; one needs to
filter and sift through these ideas to realize whether they are real opportunities.
Most of the times, these ideas remain dormant because of the lack of courage,
resources, time and money or mere inability to take action. And those who show
courage to take action generally see their dreams go off track due to lack of far
sighted vision or lack of preparedness. The business owner or the management
must own the responsibility of its success or failure regardless of the
circumstances. Successful entrepreneurs are good at turning ideas into
opportunities. They act. They execute to make it all happen. It takes time,
resources and hard work. The canvas to paint your idea is large and enormous.
You can take an idea from a secret preserving recipe to space tourism, and use
the basic elements of the recipe to turn ideas into tangible opportunities that
further allow you to make work plans
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
https://www.imd.org/publications/articles/ideas-are-the-seeds-of-new-business-
opportunity
Gartner, W.B., Carter, N.M.,& Hills, G. E. (2003).The Language of Opportunity. In
C. Steyaert & D. Hjort (Eds.). New movements in Entrepreneurship (p.103).
Vheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Amabile, T.M., Hadley, C. N., & Kramer, S. J. (2002). Creativity under the gun.
Harvard business review, 80(8),52.
199
Unit 3 Scanning Business Opportunities in Nigeria
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
In the previous units, you have learned about different business opportunities.
Would you pick every opportunity that comes your way when setting up a
business?
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome
By the end of this unit, you will be able to evaluate different business
opportunities.
3.0 Main Content
Environmental Scanning
Going into business venture, certain steps must be taken before establishing a
new business, joining an existing one or inheriting an old business. The steps
normally start with environmental scanning. Environmental scanning can be said
to be a process of visiting sites and gathering information about prospects of
establishing a new business venture. It is indeed a casual survey of the
happenings in the proposed business environment, with a view to assessing the
possibility and the viability of a new business. Every entrepreneur performs
environmental scanning before starting a business. Medical practitioner, for
example perform scan on a pregnant woman to determine the sex and position of
the baby before delivery. Teachers scan the environment to detect examination
cheats, by observing the attitude and movement of students who have form the
habit of writing on their palms, laps, desks, pieces of paper during tests and
those who are the habit of ―going to the toiletǁ. Students who cheat in
examinations also scan the environment, to determine when careless invigilators
relax, sleep or read newspapers.
A motor mechanic who wishes to establish a workshop must scan the
environment to determine a site where there are many motor owners and users
and other supporting artisans, such as welders, vulcanizes, spare part sellers
and electricians, to complement his trade. A computer technician who has
200
completed his training and wishes to establish a workshop, must scan the
environment before choosing a location for his workshop. He could go to the
computer village or hire a workshop at an attractive site. Market women, who sell
at street corners, scan then environment before choosing the sites. Even the
federal and state governments scan the environment before locating schools,
hospitals, industries, universities, etc.
Advantages of Environmental scanning
• Scanning the environment is better and safer method of assessing than
jumping into the business environment.
• Environment scanning gives on-the-spot assessment of the immediate
happenings in the environment, instead of relying on stories.
• It assists the entrepreneur to assess his personal strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats (SWOT) in the environment, and in choosing
favourable ones while avoiding unfavourable ones;
• Scanning the environment assists the entrepreneur to observe business
trends as they occur in their natural manner. Trends are the known
occurrences in the environment that has assume identifiable patterns over
a period. It is better and easier to manage something that has a pattern
than something that has no pattern;
• It assists the entrepreneur to observe business treads in the locality and to
see how those trends would affect his business positively and negatively.
Self-Assessment Exercises
Why is it important to carry out an environmental scanning before a decision is
made on where a business enterprise is sited in a particular location?
4.0 Conclusion
Scanning the environment is better and safer method of assessing than jumping
into the business environment.
This unit provides the various definitions of entrepreneurship, concept of
business venture. Location and environmental scanning for citing business
enterprise are equally treated.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
201
Video
Audio
6.0 Reference/Further Readings
https://adesojiadegbulu.com/viable-business-opportunities
Abisuga, C.A (1985). How to start and run your own Business in Nigeria. Owerri:
Odu Printing Company.
Papanek, G.F. (1962). The Development of Entrepreneurship. American
Economic Review, Supplement May (45-58).
202
Unit 4 Environment and New Venture Idea Generation
Contents
1.0 Introduction
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
3.0 Main Content
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 References/Further Reading
1.0 Introduction
You could have a good business idea, have the opportunity that would help to
bring the idea to fulfilment, but the good idea and the opportunity may not be able
to succeed because of unfriendly environment. What is this environment? You
will find the answer in this unit.
2.0 Intended Learning Outcome (ILO)
By the end of this unit, you will be able to select adequate environment for a new
venture
3.0 Main Content
Business idea generation and opportunity analysis are the foundation for
launching a new business or venture. The origin of a business idea and the
analysis of the opportunity needed to build and grow such idea into a business
structure is one necessary marriage in entrepreneurship. The process of
generating business idea could be learn and developed. This is a unique quality
that an entrepreneur need to develop if he wants to generate business ideas that
would later become a business structure.
In this section, we will discuss the concept of business idea generation, available
methods for generating new business ideas, creative problem-solving
techniques, innovation, types of innovation, difference between innovation and
creativity. The purpose of is to provide fresh impetus for the prospective
entrepreneur to see the idea of becoming a business owner in the Nigerian
environment as a possibility. Existing entrepreneurs will find this section very
helpful in assisting them to generate new business ideas or concepts that will
grow their business in term of product or services they rendered.
Idea generation (ideation) is an emerging buzzword representing the creative
process of generating, developing, and communicating new ideas, while an idea
is understood as a basic element of thought that can be visual, concrete, or
abstract. Ideation can be contrasted with brainstorming in that brainstorming is a
specific instance of ideation. Brainstorming employs specific rules (such as
203
disallowing any contributor to negate any idea offered during a brainstorming
session), while ideation encompasses all techniques that can be used to
generate ideas.
Idea generation is also critical to the design and marketing of new products,
marketing strategy, and to the creation of effective advertising copy. In new
product development, for example, idea generation is a key component of the
front end of the process, often called the “fuzzy front end” and recognized as
one of the highest leverage points for a company.
The business idea arises from an opportunity in the market. It originates from real
demand for any product or service that an entrepreneur should have a keen and
open mind to look for opportunities and generate business ideas.
While selecting a business idea, the following points need adequate
consideration:
i. The business idea should enable the entrepreneur to utilize his technical
and professional skills. If an entrepreneur has knowledge of some special
manufacturing techniques, because of previous experience or otherwise, it
would be easier for the entrepreneur to manage such techniques
effectively.
ii. It should enable the use of locally available raw materials for product or
service. As compared to imported materials/ local materials are easy to
procure.
iii. It should ensure making products that have a demand, but are not freely
available in the market. It is potentially a good idea to start with a product
that could be sold.
iv. It should enable the entrepreneur to solve a current problem existing in the
market. Products may be available in the market but they do not meet the
demand fully or in a satisfactory manner. Sometimes, an existing product
is used in combination with another, which is not available. Attempts to
solve such market problems do give rise to business ideas.
Sources of Information for Business Ideas
As said earlier, generation of project idea is the starting point in product
development. For this, an entrepreneur can refer to potential studies prepared by
different organisations. There are a number of potential studies conducted by
several organisations like the National Council of Applied Economic Research
(NCAER), financial institutions and other promotional organisations such as
Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), etc. These may include the following:
204
a. Area studies which identify development potential of particular areas like a
backward area or a district.
b. Sub sectoral studies which identify opportunities in specified subsectors
(such as food processing).
c. Resource-based studies which identify opportunities based on utilisation
of natural or industrial resources such as forest-based industries, marine-
based industries, industries using rubber as the main raw material, etc.
d. Studies of the product consumption pattern of the country.
e. Surveys of existing industrial establishments.
f. Import and export possibilities.
Approaches to Generating Ideas
While exploring different sources of business ideas, an entrepreneur can use the
following approaches to generate ideas:
i. Brainstorming. It helps in generating a large number of product ideas. It
should be conducted by an expert and none of the ideas mentioned
should be evaluated or judged. At this stage one should not worry if the
ideas are suitable or not.
ii. New ways of doing old things. A large number of products are being made
and provided in the market using traditional methods and practices. One
approaches can be to examine if these could be made by a different and
newer method that would give the entrepreneur an advantage over the
older methods.
iii. Converting hobby into business. Some people are adept at doing
something or the other as a hobby or for use in the house only. It is
possible to use such skills to set up an enterprise. Hobbies like
photography, interior decoration, fashion designing etc. are often
developed as business ventures.
iv. Improving an existing product. An existing product can be improved by
using old techniques with more care or using newly developed technology.
v. Utilising waste material. Conservation and environment protections are
presently getting a lot of attention. Recycling waste or turning them into
useful products are good product ideas. Presently, energy conservation
products also have good potential.
205
Selection of Project Idea
At this stage, all the project ideas are screened on the basis of well-defined
criteria to eliminate ideas which are not promising and select the best idea. While
selecting the idea, the following facts should be considered:
• The project should be compatible with the objectives and resources of the
entrepreneur. It should also match his capabilities and skills.
• The resources required for the project such as capital requirements,
technical know-how, raw materials, power supply etc. must be reasonably
assured.
• The cost structure of the proposed project must enable it to realise
reasonable returns on investment.
• The effect of external environmental factors such as technological
changes, state of economy, competition, etc. should be considered.
• The project idea should be consistent with the government policies,
licensing requirements, environmental regulations, foreign exchange
regulations, etc.
4.0 Conclusion
Idea generation is also critical to the design and marketing of new products,
marketing strategy, and to the creation of effective advertising copy. In new
product development, for example, idea generation is a key component of the
front end of the process, often called the “fuzzy front end” and recognized as one
of the highest leverage points for a company.
The business idea arises from an opportunity in the market. It originates from real
demand for any product or service that an entrepreneur should have a keen and
open mind to look for opportunities and generate business ideas.
5.0 Summary
To recap what you have learned in this unit, click on the video below or copy the
link and paste on a web browser. The video is a summary of what you have read
in this unit. You could also click on the audio version and listen. You can also
download them and play offline.
206
Video
Audio
6.0 References/Further Readings
https://www.theseus.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/130768/Halinen_Anu.pdf
https://helda.helsinki.fi/bitstream/handle/10227/292/189-978-952-232-011-7.pdf?
Barringer, B. R. & Ireland, R. D. 2010. Entrepreneurship successfully launching
new ventures. 3rd ed. One Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, USA:
Pearson Education. 608 p. ISBN 10: 0-13-815808-8.
207
